# Crossroads: The Infrastructure Podcast - Master Transcripts

**Generated:** 2025-08-15 16:12:12
**Total Episodes:** 3

Episodes organized by publication date (newest first).

---

## 2025-07-25

### Wafra's Head of Infrastructure details strategy for navigating global uncertainty
**Publication Date:** 2025-07-25 19:45:14+00:00
**Episode ID:** 4432

**Full Transcript:**
Hello, and welcome to Crossroads, the infrastructure podcast. I'm InfraLogic's Managing Editor for the Americas, Jonathan Carmody. And today we have Edward Tsai, Managing Director and Head of Real Assets and Infrastructure at Wafura. Wafura is an asset manager focused on the infrastructure sector, and it invests on behalf of its majority owner, the Public Institution for Social Security. Edward, pleasure to have you on the podcast today. Jonathan, it's a pleasure to be here. Really appreciate you having me on. Edward, can we start with a brief overview of who Wafura is and how you operate within the infrastructure space? Absolutely. So Wafura is a New York-based alternative asset management firm. We've been around since 1985. We're actually celebrating our 40th anniversary this year, and we're active primarily across three main verticals. That's GP stakes, infrastructure, which I lead, and then real estate. And then within the infrastructure business, the way we really think of ourselves is we're focused on investing in value-add opportunities in the middle market. And the way we think about that, to be value-add, it's really opportunities to have sponsor-led value creation. So whether that's in putting together a business from the ground up and scaling it or leading operational improvements or M&A, whatever that is, that's really the angle that we're looking for. And, you know, against the backdrop in the infrastructure space of increasingly larger funds and larger deals, we continue to see a lot of value in the middle market. You know, we think deals are a bit less competed in that space. The market is somewhat less efficient, and we think there's an opportunity to create attractive entry points. And then if you're successful in scaling those businesses, you have a lot more optionality at exit to a broader buyer universe. And the way we think about a lot of that is it's a middle market focus that allows us to underwrite really at a granular asset level. You also have the ability to access platform value creation, drive enterprise value. And that's a key differentiator for us where, you know, a lot of the larger sponsors, you know, they're really not reaching down below 250, 300 million of equity, that really doesn't move the needle for them. And so I think for us, you know, we're doing that work and we see a very active buyer universe to acquire good businesses that can really scale into that part of the ecosystem. So we've been active, you know, really, you know, predominantly in transportation and followed closely by digital infrastructure within kind of the positioning that I described. Excellent. Looking at Wafer's portfolio before this call and knowing your role within the business, Edward, we wanted to talk a lot about transportation assets initially in the first part of the podcast. So recently, Wafer managed to dispose of Global Container International. This is a lesser marine intermodal containers that you've done for several years. You've scaled that business up. That was sold in, I think, March to Triton International, which is backed by Brookfield for about a billion dollars, over a billion dollars as it was reported at the time. Talk a little bit around the thesis that Wafer has for investing in asset leasing businesses as part of its infrastructure strategy. Absolutely. Happy to. And that deal actually was signed in March and it closed a few weeks ago. So very fresh in the memory. We've been quite active across what we think of as all the major food groups within transportation asset leasing. And so that's intermodal, as you just mentioned, it's rail car, it's aviation, all different parts of the aviation lifecycle, it's trailer, it's chassis, maritime assets, and then things like warehouse and industrial equipment. And we kind of think of all that as distributed transportation infrastructure, if you will. We like all those sectors, I think, for a few simple reasons. They're physical assets, they're generally essential use, they're critical to the movement of people and goods around the world, they're generally mature technologies. And that's not just from a technological perspective, but it has the benefit of generally fairly long data sets. And that helps us understand asset value, how do those sectors behave under different marketing conditions, pricing behavior across cycles. That's a benefit as well. And you have other factors like contracted cash flows, assets generally have long economic useful lives, that latter part can be a bit of a double edged sword, if you don't have the technical resources, or you're kind of not holding them maybe in the right investment structures to kind of be able to be resilient across cycles. From the investor perspective, when we think about our investors, that all kind of combines to provide, there's a strong current income component to that, in addition to total return, there's an inflation linkage and adjusted return to ownership of the underlying physical asset itself. And then it creates diversification. I think if you look at infrastructure, more broadly, you know, it's generally less correlated to equities or bonds, and we're seeing an era where those markets, their correlation has actually increased. Those are some of the characteristics that we look for. I think if you look at the reasons I just described, they're all kind of arguments for traditional infrastructure investment. I don't think a lot of those characteristics are necessarily new. The difference that we're seeing really in our part of the space is that we think that there's a difference for a lot of these distributed transportation asset classes. They have some of the same characteristics, but they're just providing better unit economics versus kind of your traditional core or core plus. And then you also have the capacity for growth in a lot of those sectors. So as we think about our portfolio and what we're trying to achieve, if you can create enterprise value on top of those scaled pools of assets and operating businesses, then hopefully you're getting to something that looks more like private equity returns than core infrastructure. You know, one of the buzzwords that's been going around the industry for some time now is resilience. And I'm thinking about how these leasing businesses fit into the infrastructure world. Some of the issues that we've seen globally with regards to supply chain volatility and certain geopolitical risks, how are you adapting to that and how are you adapting your businesses to that? Can you tell us how some of these issues are working out in geopolitics and can you give us any forward looking observations on how that will impact these kinds of infrastructure assets going forward? It's interesting. In the breadth of our activities, I think we actually see a fairly large portion of the supply chain and whether that's cargo kind of that's going into containerized trade, going into air freighters, goods, commodities by rail, truck or barge. And each of those sectors has really reacted differently at different points in time over the last few years. And at a high level, I think what you're seeing is a realignment of priorities when we think about the global supply chain that was really built over decades to prioritize cost efficiency above all their goals. And so that was obviously driven by kind of, you know, global labor arbitrage from developed economies to other regions. And that's created just really vast amounts of physical infrastructure to support and accelerate that process. So it's not just, you know, kind of seaborne or airborne trade. It's all the inland infrastructure that's been built up over decades to handle those increasingly larger volumes of goods and help them move more efficiently. So it's the border infrastructure, it's the inland rail depots, chassis pools, switching yards, you know, you can go on and on, you know, that's all built up so you can service, you know, really massive, ultra-large container vessel, 24,000 TU, taller than the Empire State Building, right? And move that through the system. So now you kind of get to the last five years and more recently, you know, you have other priorities that are coming into focus, right? So that started maybe with the pandemic to some extent, but that's accelerating under US trade policy and then now you have geopolitical concerns. So that's expressed in terms of, you know, you said resiliency, you know, you can say supply chain security, robustness, onshore and nearshore and French shoring, whatever it is, but all of that is like that massive container vessel, it's going to take a lot of time and lots of infrastructure investment to start to effectuate those changes. And then, you know, we think private capital has a huge role in that if you look at government budgets and kind of policies around the world. So that's at a high level, you know, as we start to kind of click down, as we see that supply chain, there is very much, you know, in some senses, a law of unintended consequences. I mean, these are really complex supply chains that have been built up, you know, cost is still going to be the major driver when people make, you know, CapEx decisions. But as these other priorities come more into focus, you know, we think, you know, that efficiency as it starts to not be, you know, the only focus, then the efficiency of the system will require more transportation equipment overall. And so that's something that we think we'll see in medium term in intermodal. It's something we're pursuing actively in the aviation space. So I'll give you an example where some of those complex supply chains have continued to have knock-on effects. So we're invested in a company called Aquila Air Capital. It's a aircraft engine lessor, and our thesis there is really, you know, if you look back on the pandemic and the OEM manufacturing challenges, you know, there are 4,000 fewer commercial passenger planes flying today in the global fleet than would have been the case without the pandemic. And then global passenger demand has exceeded 2019 levels last year. And so that's all created an environment where you have equipment that's flying aircraft that's flying for longer than they otherwise would have. You require more maintenance on older aircraft. At the same time, you have a huge talent drain from MROs and maintenance shops, which is creating a bottleneck for all of that. And so I think that creates a structural demand and undersupply that is going to persist, you know, we think, for a number of years. And Aquila is really at the heart of that where, you know, we have a very experienced management team, very focused on the technical aspects of a very technical industry. And the demand, we think, for spare engines will only continue to increase. What we like about asset classes like that is, you know, we don't have to be against that volatility that you mentioned. We don't have to be 100% prescient about, you know, where exactly that demand is going to arise in every single period. Our assets can be on wing to any number of operators around the world, so long as the economics and jurisdiction and customer credit and things like that make sense. So we can attach to this longer term trend without needing to be millimeter precise on kind of a large fixed asset somewhere. I'm very glad you mentioned that one. There was obviously your most recent investment in the infrastructure space, GCI obviously being the most recent divestment. Aquila, you bought kind of at the end of 2024, as I understand it, and GCI was sold around, as you said, March, between March and June. We've seen in this kind of nine month period, a lot of uncertainty, a lot of upheaval, especially with US trade policy. Did that really affect the negotiations at all in the deal to either acquire Aquila or to sell GCI? Was that a big point of debate and how did you reassure the counterparties in those deals? Was that all based, as you said, on your long term strategy, the long term vision, and you just have to block out the noise and keep driving ahead because you're confident in the direction of travel? It's a great question. I would be taking Intermodal Container and GCI as an example. We launched that process kind of in the late summer of last year and identified where a likely kind of buyer universe was. I would say that the US trade policy noise was probably less of a factor than you might think. And I think that's really the result of kind of a confluence of different factors. Within transportation asset leasing, I think we've seen an increasing amount of sponsor interest and activity in the space. And so that's not just our deal, but it's in the three or four deals before that. When we invested into that company initially in 2018, we saw some of those characteristics that we considered infrastructure and we've kind of seen that play out. And so I think there is a broader, increasing amount of comfort with what are the unit economics in that business? How does that behave? This isn't the first time that there's been disruption to that industry. It's gone through several cycles. And I think that data gave us comfort and I think gives others comfort. So I think that's one factor. I think another is there's a scarcity value in some of these businesses and platforms, especially ones of a certain scale. And so as we look across that industry, when we exited, our business was number six or seven globally, and there really weren't any scale of platforms of lesser, of smaller scale. And so you had a heightened investor interest, you had consolidation, and then you kind of had this longer term thesis of what is going to happen in the next quarter, next few quarters. Is containerized trade going away? What is the demand for equipment? So I think all of those things kind of combined together to mean buyer interest, we think is robust across that because some of the characteristics of transport asset leasing, if you're being disciplined on the way you go about it, are going to be intact for a long time. Aviation is a little bit of a more nuanced story. I'd say, you know, we've been active across all parts of a life cycle. That's one that's been, you know, because of some of those undersupply dynamics that I was describing as a competition for kind of all aircraft, especially new aircraft, mid-life aircraft, you know, we perceive as fairly high. What we like about the engine leasing space within that broader ecosystem is that it's really, it's less of a financial product, you know, you're not interacting necessarily with your customer's CFO office. You're really interacting with kind of the maintenance groups and their prerogatives are really just to keep aircraft in the air. So that operational aspect of it, I think makes it a lot more defensible. It's a lot of work to kind of put together portfolios, very high touch. So we see that particular sub-segment of aviation as one where, you know, you can create outsize return, but you can also kind of grow that business for the next three, five, seven years because some of these production issues are going to take a long time to work out from the OEMs. I want to just touch on one other transportation asset that you've invested in. You launched an FBO joint venture together with Nova Infrastructure for Hawthorne Global Aviation Services, a fixed-based operator with multiple locations in the United States. I'm curious about this one. This has proven to be a very popular asset for infrastructure investors. We look at other platforms out there like Signature Aviation or Atlantic Aviation. It seems like every infrastructure investor admires this kind of asset. They find that there's an attractive, you know, risk-adjusted premium you can extract from a business like this. How has that relationship with Nova worked out? How has that business developed and how much room is there to grow a business like that in your strategy? That's one where the relationship with Nova has been fantastic. I think it's been a close working relationship and it's one where we see a high level of fragmentation still within that industry. It's a platform where, you know, I think we're 14 locations going to the 17 locations. There's just a very high-touch operational aspect to our thesis there, which is it's a business that we liked quite a bit. It was really one that wasn't operated from the standpoint of kind of a, you know, single cohesive vault, right? It was one that was very regionalized, site-specific, and so, you know, didn't have kind of common pricing procurement strategies in place. So it's one where we saw kind of the ability to be value-add as high. So it's kind of doing some of the things that kind of just make sense of unifying the business. It's augmenting the leadership team at the company. And then it's pursuing, you know, bolt-on M&A. So acquired a number of businesses kind of out of the gate, you know, closing on some additional site locations. And as we're putting that together and scaling it, you know, I think there are opportunities because, you know, going back to the theme of platform scarcity, we think that's going to be well-positioned to benefit, not just from kind of investor interests, you know, from kind of the larger sponsors, but sponsors who are, you know, looking to get into the space or have, you know, a thesis of continuing to grow and scale that business. It's one where it's kind of that traditional, I would say, private equity toolkit that we really approached kind of the value-add space and infrastructure with. Our underwriting is always kind of at that asset level, you know, what is this site producing or the economics of this business kind of at a fundamental level? But then I think if you're able to kind of roll up your sleeves and do some of that operational work, do some of the M&A, I think that's where you can kind of access platform and enterprise value. Moving on to a topic that's very close to our hearts here at Infralogic, we're very interested in the blurring lines between real estate, infrastructure, and private equity. Now, within your alternative real asset strategy, how closely do you work with the real estate business and how many opportunities are you finding with that side of the business where, you know, those strategies are converging either in a single deal or a single kind of investment thesis? The way we segment real estate into what we call, and maybe it's just our term, but alternative real estate and traditional real estate. And alternative real estate to us really just means real estate businesses that have a large operational component where you're not just kind of outsourcing the operating aspects of the underlying asset. And in fact, you're kind of, you're driving a lot of the value of the asset in the business by developing and operating it. And we see that as hand in hand in a lot


---

## 2025-07-24

### Macquarie execs discuss changing landscape of US energy
**Publication Date:** 2025-07-24 21:31:18+00:00
**Episode ID:** 4431

**Full Transcript:**
Hello, and welcome to Crossroads, the infrastructure podcast. I'm Chuck Stanley, senior energy reporter for InfraLogic, and today I have the distinct privilege of speaking with two senior members of the Macquarie Asset Management Team. Aaron Rubin is the head of Macquarie Infrastructure and Real Assets Energy Investment Team in North America, and Will Demmes is the senior managing director and head of Americas for Macquarie's Green Investment Team. We are living in interesting times, as the saying goes. Donald Trump's return to the White House in January has driven an about-face in U.S. energy policy objectives, from the Biden administration's emphasis on climate and sustainability to a preference under Trump for conventional firm power. On top of that, the ongoing rollercoaster around the Trump administration's tariff initiatives has injected new uncertainty into supply chains throughout the energy and infrastructure sectors, and the recently passed GOP budget bill has rewritten the landscape for energy incentives in the United States. Will and Aaron bring a wealth of knowledge and experience to the show, and while they said they agree more often than not with regard to trends they see in the market, it's a great time to have them both on the show to give a well-rounded perspective on where the challenges and opportunities are out there in these uncertain times. Will, Aaron, thanks so much for joining us today. Thanks for having us, Chuck. Yeah, thank you, Chuck. I'm looking forward to the conversation. As am I. And most of our listeners will no doubt be familiar with Macquarie's work in the global energy and infrastructure sector, but I'd love to start off by having each of you tell the audience a little bit about your roles with the firm and what situations you primarily work on. Will, would you like to go first? Thanks, Chuck. As you mentioned, I lead our green investment team here in the Americas, but the green investment team is a global team, so we are actually active across the globe. Macquarie as an institution has been investing in energy transition, whether it's offshore wind, solar molecules, for 20 years, and we've deployed almost $20 billion into the sector. And so we've been investors in the sector for a while now, and so it's really ingrained in our institution. And as such, we've created a dedicated team that's focusing on the sector, and that team has been around since 2017 when we acquired the UK Green Investment Bank. And since then, we've built out that team and have subsequently raised a number of dedicated funds for our LPs and clients that are more pure play green investment strategies. Aaron will tell you about his strategy as well, but the areas that we're focusing on are really twofold. Number one, the decarbonization of the power sector, so that's solar and wind, geothermal hydro batteries, and then also the decarbonization of the industrial sector. We're currently focusing on things like renewable fuels, green and blue hydrogen, electric vehicles and charging infrastructure, circular economy, and clean grid. So it's a pretty wide mandate, and combined with sort of the flagship Macquarie strategies, I think we really cover a very wide opportunity set within the energy infrastructure world. I'm Aaron Rubin, I lead our energy investment team in the Americas, as you said, Chuck. My focus areas include regulated utilities, water, gas, and electric, which has been a really big target sector for us globally for over 20 years, as well as unregulated energy opportunities defined quite broadly for our diversified infrastructure funds. So that includes midstream power and a wide variety of other things. Will's team and mine collaborate very closely, and we really try to adopt a holistic investment approach. We physically sit next to each other, and a lot of our focus areas are pretty complementary. So for example, some of the biggest portfolio companies in my portfolio are electric utilities in the US, whereas some of Will's biggest focus is with wind and solar and battery developers. Our utilities have got a huge demand to build and install that sort of generation, so you can immediately see how the collaboration between those companies can add a lot of value on both sides. And it definitely seems like a busy and complicated time to be operating in all of these spaces. I appreciate you guys taking the time to appear on the show and share your thoughts. As I indicated in the intro, this year has seen some major shifts in the investment environment around energy, renewables, and the energy transition, both from a policy standpoint and macroeconomic trends. Renewables investors have been telling me that the uncertainty in particular can create real challenges when talking about long-term commitments in this space. Will, approaching this market from the standpoint of a green investment focus, are there particular sectors or types of deals where you do see more opportunity to be active right now? And do you see a bit more certainty emerging within the policy landscape as we get sort of further into this first year of the Trump administration? I'll start by saying, again, that we are a global strategy. So uncertainty really is relative to what's happening here in the U.S., but obviously that impacts the global opportunity. But I'll focus today on the U.S. because I think that's what you're alluding to in terms of uncertainty. But obviously, we've benefited for over 20 or 30 years from the tax credits that were helping accelerate the deployment of renewable energy in the United States. And it was always kind of uncertain before the IRA. Every other year, basically, it was being renewed, and there was always a bit of uncertainty in whether it would be renewed or not. So we've dealt with this, right? And I'm not saying that's the way we want to deal with it, but we've kind of grown up with this uncertainty, and we thought it was resolved with the Inflation Reduction Act. But obviously, what's going on right now is somewhat unwinding the certainty that act intended to provide. That's OK. We believe that the fundamentals of particularly wind and solar in this increased load and demand environment still holds true. And while the uncertainty around whether or not the support will be there or not, we actually don't believe that we need it, right? And that's maybe a bit of a controversial statement. We haven't changed our view in terms of the opportunity set based on today's uncertainty. We just, as an investor, certainty is always better than not, right? And so despite the outcome of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act and sort of the wind down of the credits earlier than expected, at least that gave us certainty in sort of where things were heading, or we thought that was the case. But shortly after, there was an executive order that kind of asked the agencies to look at how you actually qualify for those credits in the next short period of time, which creates more uncertainty because there's strategies of how to safe harbor and qualify your projects such that you have extended time to actually get those credits. But for the next 45 days, I guess the next 40 days or so, that's under review. And so there's a bit more uncertainty on whether the strategies we've used in the past will be applicable to what we're doing going forward. But I'd say that just having sort of the meat of the changes to the IRA understood has given us a lot of comfort and confidence. A little more clarity, but some major questions still to be addressed, sounds like. Yeah. And I'd say just to your other question around opportunities that we're seeing, I think in the U.S. specifically, we've already been very long as a green investment team and as Macquarie generally in green field developments and creating platforms that are developing and creating new assets. I think we're probably still very interested in that and will continue to support our portfolio companies that are doing that. We are also shifting a bit to focus more mature businesses, more operating assets to really complement the existing portfolio that we have. So we're looking at a number of those large IPPs, both public and private. We think there's a dislocation in the public market and the private market on these renewable IPPs. So we're evaluating many of those opportunities and seeing if it makes sense to partner with them and potentially take them private. Very interesting. And Aaron, could you maybe speak to how the changing dynamics of the market and the policy landscape have shifted your focus with regard to the type of opportunities you are pursuing? Not to minimize the role of federal policy, but I really think the biggest change in the U.S. investment landscape for energy in, call it the last two years, has been the resurgence of demand for energy and in particular electricity, which is in part a function of the dramatic growth in the data center industry and in part the trends in electrification that we had seen growing for a long time. That has translated into a huge amount of capital that needs to go into the ground to support it, whether it be pipelines, gas-fired power, LNG exports to take cheap U.S. energy internationally, investments in utility infrastructure to support all of that. It's really a generational opportunity at the moment. So identifying investment opportunities that are emerging from that, and as you can see from the examples I gave, there are a lot of them, is probably the top of our list. On the policy side, the federal policy has certainly made some sectors easier to invest in and others more difficult. I think state policy doesn't get quite the focus, but particularly in power, it's really important. One of our large utility investments, for instance, is an electric utility in Washington, Puget Sound Energy. That's got a legal mandate from the state of Washington to decarbonize the electricity sector. So loss of federal support will make that a little more expensive to do, and we've got to work hard to make sure that the impact on ratepayers is mitigated. But we spend a lot of time looking at how we build new renewable generation to achieve that in Washington. That state law pre-existed the IRA. We don't expect it's going to change with the IRA going away. So that remains a big focus. And to your point, at Infralogic, one thing that we are hearing over and over again is that demand is going to be in the driver's seat with regard to energy for at least the rest of the decade, perhaps longer. Whoever can deliver electrons to the data centers, other hyperscalers, and the utilities is going to be in a pretty good position. But at the same time, it does sound like uncertainty over the policy landscape. How are supply chains going to be able to meet the demand for development in the U.S.? The differences between those state policies, the fact that those may represent some moving targets as well. Those all create uncertainty and challenges for the investment in the near term, regardless of what technology you're pursuing. I'm curious, does that type of dynamic change the way you weigh the risks over time for different opportunities? The demand opportunity creates a lot of incentive for people to come up with creative solutions. While it creates novel problems, I think we've got a lot of confidence that they will eventually be solved. To your question about changing policy specifically, yes, certainly. Infrastructure investment as an asset class is supposed to deliver our investors a relatively low risk exposure. Overriding capital-intensive projects that don't have a high degree of certainty around their revenue streams is difficult, and when there are policy changes that threaten the certainty of those revenue streams, then clearly it makes it harder to finance new assets. I think that that theme really only applies to a small minority of assets in the scheme of things. If you look at all of the asset classes I mentioned before, whether it's LNG, whether it's utility CAPEX, whether it's pipelines, whether it's a lot of the renewable sectors that Will's focused on, the underlying demand will create certainty of revenue that will ultimately get those projects built. We generally have a pretty high degree of confidence in the investment landscape. I would agree with all that Aaron has said. I think when we talk about the growth in demand, I think most of the listeners here will be familiar with the stat that demand in the U.S., low growth in the U.S. for the last 20 or 30 years has been stagnant, but now we're projecting 2%, 3%, 4% per year over the next few decades, which is coming obviously from not just AI and data centers, but also the electrification of the industrial sector and electrification of everything, really. That trend has really come through only in the last year or two. The way that we underwrite, many of the investments that we underwrote before a year or two ago, we did not assume this type of growth. In fact, a lot of those investments look in the money right now based on that demand growth. I think going forward, acknowledging that there's maybe more growth opportunity than in the past, we'll continue to be quite conservative in our assumptions on the growth of the market, even though we know there's a meaningful upside if things continue to grow at the pace it currently is. It's about being a good investor, being a smart investor, and not investing into the trend, but investing into what your mandate is and a reasonable underwriting case. I think that's really important to remember, even in this hyper-growth world, good investors shouldn't be assuming that's definitely going to happen. That's true on both the power side as well as the other side of our strategy, which is the decarbonization of the industrial sector. We believe that there still is, from a demand side, there's strong demand still from corporates and utilities to get clean products. We don't assume they're willing to pay more for it, and fortunately, the sectors we're investing in, we don't assume that someone's going to pay more for an electron because it's clean or someone's going to pay more for a renewable fuel because it's clean. We still see that demand, and so we continue to believe that the investments we've made and will make are investing into growing sectors that will continue to offer market opportunity. Chuck, you started the question by talking about data centers and the demand coming from that. We have the good fortune to be one of the large global investors in hyperscale data centers as well. Will and I have a lot of opportunity to collaborate with our partners and portfolio companies in that space. What we're seeing there is a customer set where the capital needs of the data centers themselves dwarf even the very large costs of providing energy to those data centers. So the hyperscalers are incredibly savvy customers. They need to be served well, they need to be given cost competitive products, but at the same time, the value of their product means that there is a lot of ability to fund creative solutions to energy supply. It's certainly changing the way utilities have to think about it. Utilities have to be a lot more nimble in evolving their business model, but certainly the ones that we work closely with, deploying huge amounts of resources to go through that evolution and make sure that they can capture that market front. We see some of these massive data centers continue to develop and come online. Do you expect to see more repetition or more repeatable approaches to delivering power to these massive data centers, or is it going to continue to be more of a bespoke solution for each of these projects? I'd kick off. I think we're still figuring it out. Number one, I don't have a very clear response for you, but the amount of opportunity that there is, you'd hope that over some time there would be some strategies that are developed to make that process more efficient. Obviously power is the biggest constraint for a new data center development and construction. Our grid is not in a great shape. There's massive ambitions from the hyperscalers to build a lot of data centers. I think we need to take that with a bit of grain of salt. Not that they do want to build a lot of data centers, but without power, they won't be able to do it. There's got to be an intersection between the business strategies of the data centers and hyperscalers, as well as the power providers. We see a lot of opportunity to collaborate. As Aaron said, we have a very large data center investment. We have many investments, but one of our largest ones is a company called Align Data Centers. We brainstorm, we collaborate with them to figure out how we can solve each other's issues. There's already collaboration in the sector. I hope that from that, something emerges that is less bespoke and more rinse, wash and repeat. I haven't seen that come together yet, but I don't know if Aaron has a different experience. That industry has been moving so quickly and growing at an exponential rate. The innovative solutions that people came up with six months ago are outdated already. The overriding trend is towards scale, I think, and having solutions which are able to deliver new capacity to these customers at large scale are probably the models that are going to continue to get built on. It's kind of an ever-evolving thing. Yeah, that's right. Just going back to the broader trend towards demand growth, really kind of driving activity in the sector, we've heard much more enthusiasm going back into the gas value chain over the past six months or a year. I'm curious, Aaron, if you might want to start off speaking about where you see the strongest opportunities. You named some subsectors where you guys are interested in within sort of the near to medium term, whether midstream, generation, more towards the LNG value chain. What sort of balance do you look to strike and where do you see the greatest opportunities? Part of the context for gas investment, I think, has got to be what's happened with


---

## 2025-07-14

### The OBBB's impact on renewable energy deployment
**Publication Date:** 2025-07-14 22:26:43+00:00
**Episode ID:** 4430

**Full Transcript:**
Welcome to Crossroads, the infrastructure podcast. This is your host, Andrew Vitelli, senior editor of Energy in the Americas for InfraLogic. Thank you for tuning in. Joining us today is David Reister, a managing partner at Segway Sustainable Infrastructure. David, thank you for joining the podcast. Happy to be here, Andrew. So today we are going to discuss the one big beautiful bill that was signed into law this past weekend. We're recording this on July 9th. Now Segway has done some really good detailed analysis of what the impact of that bill is likely to be both for renewable investment and for deployment. And that's one of the reasons that I was really eager to have David on. But before we get into that, David, can you tell me a little bit about your background in the renewable energy industry? Sure, Andrew. So I have spent most of my career in renewable energy. I had a few years in venture capital in the first five years of my career, but then shifted over in the early days of SunEdison into the solar and broader renewable space. That whole time I've either been bouncing between project finance roles or investment roles on various investment teams. So I'm kind of a token finance guy. But over the years, I've certainly become pretty competent in a lot of the areas of development and build on operating of solar power plants. The group I co-founded at SunEdison was called the Global Special Situations Group, very grandiosely named, and we spun out from there and created an investment firm called GSSG Solar, which was the start of my sort of development capital investment experience. We focused on the Japanese market at a time when there was a very lucrative feed-in tariff there. I've also spent some years running project finance teams, including the project finance team at Cypress Creek, kind of during its heyday. When I left there in 2019, I wanted to bring some of the success we had at GSSG Solar doing development stage investments and bring that into the U.S. and Canadian markets through my whole career. I was always sitting in the spot where people were asking me to find development capital for pre-construction, and it was always the scarcest thing, the sticky gear in the machine. And we figured out how to do it well in Japan, and I wanted to bring that to the U.S. market. That's what Segway is. It's a strategy focused on the pre-NTP phases of a project for solar, wind, storage, and transmission projects. It's a private equity structure. We were founded about four years ago, currently investing out of our second fund. We have about $300 million in assets under management. By design, it kind of has to be that size or smaller because the check sizes tend to be fairly small. So it's a little bit of a stay small and stay very focused sort of strategy. We've got 14 people. Half of them are in San Francisco, half are scattered around. And yeah, we make investments at all stages of development. Sure, sometimes it's just posting a few deposits three months before NTP, but more frequently, it's an earlier stage investment. Sometimes as early as just some smart people with a circle on a map. But in all cases, we partner with a frontline development partner. Sometimes that's just one person. Sometimes it's a bigger shop of 40, 50 people. When you make these early stage investments, it's fairly expensive money. We're prepared to lose all of our money on projects that die, and that does happen. So there aren't that many groups doing this because it's a pretty uncomfortable strategy for a lot of folks that have been underwriting to protecting the downside for their whole career. This is a situation where you're not always going to be able to protect your downside and you need to have a few things that go really well. We sell at NTP or DevComplete somewhere in that zone. And when we sell, the liquidity is sort of shared between us and our frontline development partner. Sometimes that's nothing. Sometimes it's a failure. Sometimes things go really well and we get a 5X. But in the aggregate, of course, one hopes that the fund level returns come up pretty good and so far they have. Expensive money, but developers keep their autonomy. They have aligned capital partners, a pretty useful group of people that want the same And you get a chance to maximize your project value by carrying it deeper into the development cycle. And I think that business model has been generally well received. But of course, the connection to what we're talking about here is that we constantly make decisions about whether to keep projects alive or kill them. And they're very difficult decisions always. And this bill makes it a lot harder. It introduces a number of new variables into figuring out can and should this project carry on further and get more capital support. And that's why we decided to do the analysis because it's one of the things we do every day is figure out what is the risk adjusted return of moving this project along and how do we make those decisions at a portfolio level such that we get good aggregate returns. And it's a tricky part of the job and it's particularly tricky right now. Yeah, absolutely. And obviously, we've seen a lot of people and spoken to a lot of people who are opinionated and have views of what's going to happen with the one big, beautiful bill throughout the process. But very few have put it into numbers and done the type of detailed analysis that I think Segway has. And Segway has really done it every step of the way from the first time something passed out of the House to the Senate bill. So we've been able to see how the potential impact changes as there are changes to the bill. So looking now, now that we have a final bill that's been signed, can you give a little bit of a synopsis about how you think what we ended up with is likely to impact the industry? Of course, it's still a slightly moving target because we're all taking educated guesses at what this executive order means for the ultimate treasury guidance. But the battle to get this bill to limit the damage as much as possible was very focused on having a start of construction standard with a long enough window to allow folks to, in an organized and diligent fashion, decide which projects sort of deserved and warranted the investment necessary to safe harbor the projects to get the 30% ITC. The start of construction standard offers a little bit more flexibility than just a hard placed in service cliff on the back end, which would of course make construction financing very difficult because there's just this binary risk, the sort of Damocles kind of hanging out there for you. With the start of construction standard, you probably end up having a longer window as far as when projects are actually finished, whether or not they still get the ITC or not. And that was really the main focus together with keeping transferability in the mix because transferability has proven really healthy for the market. And then of course, getting storage carved out, which somewhere along the way, we realized that it didn't quite have the same stigmas on it as solar and wind had it. And there was a pathway to get it kind of carved out from all this. So it's a very weird place to be, to be demonized in this fashion as a sector. And we're all sort of licking our wounds because just say some very big punches were just landed and it looks like they're not quite done. When you quantify it, what would we say are the headline numbers in terms of what impact this bill is going to have two years from now, five years from now, how much less renewables is going to end up on the grid and how many less dollars are going to go into the sector based on what we know now? Yeah, I think so. Our estimate on the last, on the bill that was passed is that they're relative to status quo and our status quo line is complicated because it includes sort of a pretty healthy dose of projects that are currently in the queue dying of natural causes as we call them, which is to say not from an exogenous policy event like this, but just, you know, dying because they can't get a permit or dying because the interconnection costs are too expensive or dying because you can't find somebody to pay for the electricity. Those are sort of natural causes of death and those establish our status quo line, which over the next five years, that status quo line has a little over 500 gigawatts being placed in service in the U.S. market. Our final analysis of the bill had a little less than 100 gigawatts of that being canceled. Those lines were worse. We've put out some graphs that kind of show in the different versions of the bill, how it moved around. This is the second best of all the different versions put out was this last bill, but it's still an awful lot of capacity that's killed. It's 141 billion of canceled investment. A lot of the storage that's carved out from this is going to become less interesting, which is something that we have not quite quantified in there is what, you know, sort of diminishing returns on storage. If you have less solar and wind coming on the grid, it's a big deal. It lands in a sort of probably short of a catastrophe spot where at one point we were estimating as much as 240 gigawatts in the house bill. That was our estimate for the canceled power plants would be 245 gigawatts. So relative to that house bill, this is about a third as damaging. And that's mostly due to the start of construction standard that ended up making it into the final bill, which was extremely hard fought. But we'll see. Part of our analysis made a big assumption, right? Which was that the references in the bill to old IRS notices about what start of construction actually means, the lawmakers obviously intended for this bill to pick up that same very well established standard. And we now have an executive order out that is explicitly saying they don't want that standard to be applied. And there are versions of how this plays out from here, where our estimate of a little under a hundred gigawatts being canceled ends up being way too optimistic because the start of construction standard won't really mean anything if they change the definition of that in a very severe way. That's interesting. And obviously that's kind of a new development. I think even a new development since your latest analysis came out, correct? Correct. Going back to the analysis though, when you look at the, let's say lost gigawatts that are expected, what are the main drivers of that? What are the clauses or law changes that are going to be most damaging? So the right way to think about this, and it gets a little bit nuanced, something a lot of people said to me over the last six weeks is if there's all this demand out there, which is what you're telling me is true, and that's why we can't pass this bill that cuts off a lot of capacity. There's all this demand that needs to be served. And you're telling me that wind and solar are from an LCOE standpoint, the cheapest and quickest way to get power available to off-takers on the grid, such as a data center. Then what's the problem? Why don't you just accept the end of the subsidy? If your product is that good and there's all this demand, what's the problem? And the problem is of a sequencing nature. That point is well taken. And I think in the long term, correct. In the longterm sort of equilibrium, maybe eight to 10 years out, something like that, we don't need a subsidy and competing on a level playing field with all other forms of power, there will be many, many applications and places in America where solar and wind installations will play a huge role, usually coupled with storage. The problem is what happens on the way there and how much we fall behind in all of the sectors that require a lot of power. And the sequencing problem I'm talking about is this. At the time that you need to decide to put more money into a project, you've got a $2 million need or a $10 million posting, right? You have to look into the future and assess the probability that the project ends up having value margin in it. How far out you think that's going to be and what that value creation looks like, right? The probability of a win and what the win looks like and when it arrives. At the time that we are asked to make a lot of these big investment decisions in projects that are impacted by the bill, we won't know certain things like how quickly is the demand side of the market going to understand that they need to absorb higher prices because supply is going down and the cost of that supply is going up. Will they understand that immediately? Some will. Some of the data center developers understand exactly what's happening and they're saying, I'll sign the new price. I need the power. But a lot of the offtakers of electricity are regulated or stubborn or less sophisticated and they don't know what price they should renegotiate it to. And therefore you don't know if you have a project that's worth anything, right? So if you have a project right now in 2030, and this is true for us in 10 or so cases, we got a PPA for a project that's meant to place in service in 2030 and somebody, you know, the offtaker comes to us or the utility that's doing the interconnection comes to us and says, okay, you got to post $30 million of deposits across these two projects. A lot of it's going to be at risk. So you have to come up with the money and you have to expose it to possibility of losing it if you don't finish the project. But the PPAs that we won were set to prices from four months ago that assumed a 30% ITC would be in place. Now in the end, does that offtaker need the power enough to behave rationally and renegotiate the price that's in the PPA? Maybe, probably in a lot of cases, yes, but we won't know that in that example and many others, we won't know the answer to that until well after the time that we have to invest a significant amount of money into the project to keep it alive. And that sort of timing sequencing problem in the end, yes, we probably end up fine in most cases, but which ones are the most that work out and which ones are the ones where you can't find a agreeable price for electricity with an offtaker? We don't know which are which, and you can't just take a leap off of a cliff with that saying, ah, it'll work out in the end with some of these check sizes. amounts of money that completely rely upon, in the end, an offtaker paying 25, 30% more than they were paying before for the electricity. And you just don't know if and when the answer to that will be, yes, they're ready. And so a lot of products will die. You have to be a responsible fiduciary. Doing that is gambling. It's not investing, right? I can't put that amount of capital exposed to something I have absolutely no control over that won't reveal itself for a couple of years. So David, just to a little bit flesh out the other side of that discussion, the argument is that because of data centers, AI, there's a growing need for power. And other than renewables, when you look at the next five years, there's just nothing that's going to be ready. So at the end of the day, these offtakers need that power, and they're not going to be able to use other sources. Electricity is not ready. Coal is not realistic. And gas turbines, the components are not going to be available until 2029, 2030 at the earliest. So at the end of the day, they're going to need that power. And whatever the economics pencil out at, that's what they're going to pay. So what you're saying is that it'll take more time for that equilibrium to be reached than it will to the time you have to make those decisions. Am I summarizing that accurately? Yes, that's right. I think that equilibrium or proof of that theory will arrive with time slowly, and it's not going to be true in every instance, right? And that sort of equilibrium of they need the power, and you're the only ones that can build it in this next five year window, therefore, this has to work out. It sounds right. It is right in a microeconomics 201 class, but in practice, supply doesn't always meet demand at the local level perfectly, right? We may have developed a project thinking could be a data center offtaker, but this utility will probably want it. It's not always developed directly to the sort of demand that is likely to hell or high water their way to saying yes to a new price. To what extent exactly that hypothesis is true, which is that they'll have no other choice but to pay whatever they need to pay for this electricity. While we wait for that to prove itself out or come into focus, a lot of investment decisions have to be made that are very hard to responsibly make if you don't know which of those projects are going to clear in this sort of new market. It might be that half of our projects in the end, there is an offtaker that says, well, I don't want to pay this much more, but I have to. Which half is it? We don't know. It's very hard to know at this point when you've got a project that's going to place in service in four years. So you end up just kind of shrugging your shoulders and saying, I don't control this outcome. It's going to work out a lot of the time, but not all the time. What do I do with that? So maybe a rough parallel. It was a little bit of a different situation. But a few years ago, we had basically a slew of PPAs that had been reached at a certain price with the assumption that costs would keep coming down. And then you had some of the supply chain issues. You had inflation, and it became clear that the projects just could not be built economically at those PPA prices. And you saw a lot of renegotiations. How is this different? And are there ways that this is similar than that? If anything, you have kind of this one big event that might be easier to predict in some ways, right? Yeah, I think that comp from 2021 is a good one. It's the best one we have. That experience, I think, surprised a lot of developers and investors in portfolios and projects.


---

