# Deal Talks - Master Transcripts

**Generated:** 2025-08-15 16:12:12
**Total Episodes:** 1

Episodes organized by publication date (newest first).

---

## 2025-08-05

### Brian McMullen and James Trout discuss Snowhawk and CleanArc’s partnership and future-proof datacentre platforms
**Publication Date:** 2025-08-05T08:00:00
**Episode ID:** 5061

**Full Transcript:**
Welcome to Energy Evolution, a Plants Podcast brought to you by S&P Global Commodity Insights, where we explore the critical moments shaping our energy future. I'm your host, Ekal Lavya Gupte, and in this episode, we will be looking at some of the developments around Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, which enables international cooperation to tackle climate change and to unlock financial support for developing countries using carbon markets. We will explore the evolving dynamics of carbon finance, the opportunities for national ownership, and the critical role carbon registries play. This comes as several countries, companies, project developers, and policymakers are getting more active in using Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. Now, under Article 6, countries can transfer carbon credits earned from eligible domestic projects to other countries, helping them meet their climate targets. And it has been a remarkable few months for carbon markets, especially following the historic decisions made at COP29 in Baku last November, where key rules and guidelines around Article 6.2 and Article 6.4 were finally agreed upon, paving the way for countries to engage more effectively in carbon trading. In this episode, I am joined by Gurvinder Bans, the Director of Business Development of Environmental Solutions, which is part of S&P Global Commodity Insights, and Yu Salve, who is a Senior Director of Market Development and Partnerships, and Gold Standard, which is a key carbon markets and sustainable development standard setter. In this episode, we will unpack the implications of these recent developments and how they have shaped the strategies of countries, registries, and companies navigating carbon markets. The conversation also dwells into the options available for countries looking to access carbon markets, including the Centralised Paris Agreement crediting mechanism, the establishment of national programmes, and the utilisation of independent standards. Now let's head straight into the conversation. Firstly, Yu and Gurvinder, thank you for joining us on the podcast. Great to have you here, especially in the studio. To kick off, obviously, it's been a fairly eventful 2025 in the Article 6 space. And one of the big reasons maybe is, you know, we had a sort of historic decision at COP29 in Baku last year. So maybe to start the scene, can you give us a little bit of colour on how things have progressed or not progressed? Yeah, I mean, it's been a long journey to get to where we are right now. And really, if you look back over the past 10 years since the Paris Agreement was signed, there's essentially been what you could say is three phases of implementation of Article 6. So you had a first phase after the Paris Agreement was adopted, but before you had any of the implementing rules for Article 6, where for about six years, there were really very few countries which were getting ready and starting to implement Article 6. You had Switzerland working with several different countries internationally, but nothing that was really actually being done, no authorisation, some agreements, but no authorisations. We then had the first big breakthrough at Glasgow in 2021, where we had adoption of the first and really the primary set of rules for how Article 6 is adopted. And that really set off a second phase where we started to see much more of a flurry of agreements between different governments globally, the kind of lines of who is connected with who has bilateral agreements with each other, really started to increase. And we started to see some of the first projects being authorised in that period after that as well. And then the Baku decision, which we got last November, has really moved us into a new phase, what you could maybe see as a third phase, where we now have the full rulebook for Article 6. There is no more questions about what comes next, which has really delayed some action over the past few years. We now have the full rulebook. It's not a plan for it to be amended for several years. And we now see governments taking more seriously their adoption, their implementation of Article 6. Around the same time, we had two important things which came in as well. So we had more decisions on which standards can supply credits for Corsia for its first phase. And that really unlocked or kind of started to unlock more supply coming through to meet the demand which we expect under Corsia over the years to come. And we've also now entered a phase where we have Article 6.4. So the new UN crediting mechanism. This is now operational. So this has moved from theory into practice. We have the standards in place. The registry is being looked at. We have methodologies which are being adopted. And so we've moved from a period of maybe four or five years where you didn't really have action under the UN. You had independent standards like us. We're now moving into a period where UN crediting is there alongside the work of independent standards. So this new phase, I think, is an exciting one. Hopefully, it's a long one and we don't see too many fourth and fifth phases. But it feels like we're in a different period right now. Yeah, just to pick up on a couple of things that Hugh said there. I think from our conversations with countries, we're seeing that they're increasingly looking at carbon as a national asset. They're looking to take control of methodologies and economics and the way that they think they can do that is through setting up national programs. And S&P is building the Red Cross Registry for Kenya, which has decided to go down this route. In terms of the kind of authorization process, authorization under Article 6 and Corsair is quite an involved process. It requires insurance. It requires commercial discussions and NDC accounting. And countries need that time to do proper NDC assessment before providing authorization or they risk overselling and not meeting their own NDCs. And that's a really serious concern because if a country oversells, it affects their reputation in the market. In the next round of NDCs, bi-countries will be concerned about that. At the same time, countries have got developers coming to them asking them for letters of authorization and corresponding adjustments. Countries really need to have proper data and tools to support this process, visibility over carbon crediting activities in their countries in order to take these kinds of decisions. Thanks, Gurvinder. Now, we know your team recently released a white paper highlighting the sort of need for effective carbon registries. So can you tell us a little bit about that, please? Yes. So the white paper is really focused on countries and providing some clarity around what a registry does, demystifying some of the jargon and setting out the various options that countries have for accessing the carbon markets and also some of the pros and cons of each of those options as well. And the three options for countries to access the carbon markets are to build a national program to utilize the Paris Agreement crediting mechanism, which offers a centralized standardized approach determined by the UN. It comes with a lot of predictability and credibility. And the third option is to leverage what already exists in the market and has been developed over decades, in the case of some standards, leverage the independent standards that exist in the market. And they have an established relationship, they're understood by buyers and project developers, and they also offer countries a degree of flexibility. And I think the likely outcome is that countries will employ a combination of all three options. And if we think about timing-wise, given that the independent standards are there and up and running, and there's already activity in that space, it would make sense to utilize as much of that as possible. And then when the Paris Agreement crediting mechanism is fully functional, to start utilizing that. And then over time, as the country understands, builds up more knowledge about carbon credits and activities in their jurisdiction, and understands how many transactions they're likely to have a year, think about setting up that national program. Are there any examples of countries using some of the options that you've mentioned? So we have examples already of countries which are looking to do what Govinda's just shared and to adopt different models as they're looking to bring carbon finance into their country. So India right now is setting up a new carbon credit offsetting scheme within the jurisdiction. This is something which they see sitting alongside projects being registered under independent standards like gold standard, maybe under the Paris Agreement crediting mechanism as well. We have Thailand, which for many years has run the Thailand Voluntary Emission Reduction Scheme, which is a national program. But we've been working with Thailand to look at how you can bring some connection between what they are doing and what we are doing as an international standard setter. There are values in having national programs. You can set methodologies which may be more context specific. You can have documentation in the national language. But you don't necessarily have that access to demand, which you may have under international standards. And this goes back to the pros and cons, which I think are set out in the white paper between these different options. Going for a national program brings some advantages for you, but does it give you that access to carbon finance, which you may get under Paris Agreement crediting mechanism or an independent standard? Cool. Thank you. And now, you know, one of the things you mentioned was that we're seeing a bit of a rise in countries wanting to take charge of their carbon markets, you know, maybe carbon nationalism. So if you can tell us a little bit about how different countries are using this as a national asset, as you mentioned, and how that feeds in with the Article 6 infrastructure, especially. Yeah. So I'm not sure I love the phrase carbon nationalism, but I think if you take a step back, what we're seeing now in the carbon market is really a reflection of the objectives that countries had when they set up the Paris Agreement. The whole idea of the Paris Agreement was moving away from a top-down, centralized framework for taking international action to more of a bottom-up approach. There is a collective goal there in the Paris Agreement, but countries get to determine how much they contribute. They get to determine how they contribute to that goal. And that is really feeding through to what we're seeing in carbon markets right now, where while in the past we had the CDM, the Clean Development Mechanism, we had joint implementation, we have these international frameworks. Those are still there, but countries have a lot more optionality in how they use carbon finance to deliver their objectives. And this is what we're seeing right now. We're seeing many countries across the world which are implementing regulations right now, and they don't all look similar to each other. They are taking different approaches which are based around national objectives, based upon national context, and as you said, based around how do I make sure that there are national benefits that come from this, and how do I make sure that we have some control over what is happening with carbon market activities in our jurisdiction. And I think really the way that these vary is in part based on how much the country is willing to look at and to work with the international market, and how much they are thinking about international harmonization, fitting with international standards, and how much they are looking at national standards, national systems, and national ownership. And we're seeing a spectrum across that across the world. Okay. Thank you. Now, we know that Gold Standard recently signed a sort of landmark deal with Indonesia. So if you can give us a little bit more detail and colour on the process that it took to get there, and also maybe what are some of the big implications, and do you see deals like this being maybe more common? Yeah. So Indonesia is a hugely important country in the context of climate action and carbon market. So fourth biggest population in the world, ninth biggest emitter of CO2 emissions from energy in the top 10 in terms of forest cover globally. And so what Indonesia does on climate action, how it engages with carbon markets really matters for the success of the market. And if you go back to 2021, Indonesia introduced regulations, which really placed a bit of a freeze on carbon crediting on projects under international standards and brought more of this national ownership around kind of national standard. And we had a period of time where it wasn't very easy to engage with the government to unlock one of the options which was there in the regulations, which was for mutual recognition. So recognition of different standards. And this really changed with the change of administration in Indonesia at the end of last year, in November of last year. Since that time, we've seen a real interest in opening up to international carbon finance, an interest in engaging with us as a standard setter, with other standard setters as well, and looking at how Indonesia can engage with national governments, with standard setters to bring carbon finance into the country in a way that provides benefits for NDC delivery for people, et cetera, as well. And so gold standard was the first standard setter to sign a mutual recognition agreement with the government of Indonesia in May of this year. This is really the framework that allows gold standard to be recognized within the country, allows the government to give explicit approval for projects under our standard, and allows those projects to deliver positive benefits and to sell their credits, whether to the domestic or international market as it's been approved. So we've taken a lot of steps to work within the system which Indonesia has set up here to make sure that this option of gold standard project development is available in Indonesia, and really to work hand in hand with the government. This is something which needs to support, align with, comply with their regulations, and this is what we've been trying to do. Thanks. And one of the big things that we're seeing in carbon markets generally is a sort of massive fragmentation, and what you just said feeds well into that. The market that's already fragmented is probably getting even more fragmented or dissected. So what does this actually mean? Yeah, it's a good question. There's a proliferation of programs, right? We've got independent standards, and now we've got countries setting up national programs. And I think at our last count, there were about 60 different standards, and they all have different methodologies and data protocols. And that's not helpful from a market perspective. What we're hearing from buyers is that it's difficult for them to keep track of these different standards, for them to understand them, and more importantly, compare them. And this really becomes a barrier to entry in the market. I think there's a real danger that buyers become experts in certain programs or regions and just trade those, and what you end up with is a small pool of suppliers and a small pool of buyers, which means smaller markets overall. And then we will struggle to achieve the higher volumes of trading, for example, that we want to see on exchanges. And ultimately, we're hindering the development of a global carbon market that can deliver the scale of emissions that are needed to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement. There are certainly a large number of programs which exist now, and we've really seen a proliferation of this over the past few years. But I think if I was to look at the market for Cornflakes, I'd probably see lots of different providers of Cornflakes as well. But we go to certain ones that we know and we trust. And so I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing that we are seeing competition when it comes to standard setting. But I think there's two things that matter. One is that we do see some form of standardization, consolidation, maybe in some places with that element of competition, which is there. But also that we see common standards which apply across our standard sectors. And so we are in an era now where there's a kind of real concern, I think, about us being on a path towards fragmentation. But some of the solutions are there and already with us right now. So if you look at how standards are set, we have the Integrity Council for the Voluntary Carbon Market, which is really trying to make sure that wherever a methodology is developed in line with certain principles, and that if you're a buyer in the future, you can trust that if this methodology has this tag, I can trust that this at least meets a certain bar. The concerns that we have for sure is around kind of fragmentation across different registries and where these credits sit. And this is really, it's really part of a transition that we have away from a kind of system in the past where you had one closed system, the gold standard registry, the Vero registry, where credits were housed, to a new system where maybe credits sit elsewhere. You have this concept of an ITMO under Article 6, which kind of sits maybe distinctly from a unit and asset as we've known in the past. And we do have solutions which can come in and support addressing that. So the S&P Meta Registry is really looking at how do you address that challenge. So some of the solutions are there already in the market to address fragmentation. The question is, do we work together to bring these through? And do we rally around some of these solutions to take us to a market which is more harmonized in the future? And there is a lot of work going on the market integrity, the market infrastructure side. There are several key initiatives that are already advancing this agenda. S&P is a member of the World Bank's Carbon Market Infrastructure Group, which is developing a digital infrastructure and registry framework to enable cross-jurisdictional compatibility and the Carbon Data Open Protocol, which is creating a shared data language for carbon assets, improving transparency and reducing friction in data exchange. And these are two really important initiatives because connectivity and interoperability are probably two of the most important things that we need to think about in terms of scaling the global carbon market. And the challenges that we're seeking to solve with the Meta Registry. The Meta Registry will allow participants to exchange data with each other in a secure and automated way. And that then provides the ability for a country to get a jurisdictional view of their crediting activities. It gives them the data that they need to take the decisions that they're expected to take, to be able to track their corresponding adjustments, and also to be able to accurately report to the UNFCCC across all programs in their jurisdiction. So these are some of the solutions that we are working on right now. I think one for the future is, as Hugh alluded to, is how we track credits across independent standard registries, host country registries, buyer registries, and just ensure that credits are tracked and accounted for correctly and accurately. And you know, we've got a few months to COP30 in Brazil later this year, but are there any big trends that you see on the lead up or in the next few months or a year that we might see in, especially related to standard setters and registries and the evolution of these markets? Are we expecting a little bit more momentum then? My hope is that this is a rare year for Article 6 where we're not seeing a big focus on what negotiated outcome will come out of COP30. The big pieces of work have been done already on the Article 6 rulebook. And that's really welcome because it allows the focus to go much more onto implementation. So if you look at the intersessional negotiations which have been taking place in Bonn in June, we've seen there on Article 6 side a focus on capacity building. So we're not looking at negotiations, what words need to be in there to provide clarity in the rulebook. We're looking at how governments can build their capacity to be able to implement what is there. And that really is the hope that we have over this next period. So we have the rulebook in place. We have a lot of bilateral agreements between different governments. We have other governments who are looking to authorise for Corsia. But we haven't seen that many moves to actually provide authorisation statements for projects yet. We have some. But if this market is really going to scale up and to make a material impact and delivering against Paris targets, this is the period really over these next few years where we really need to see more projects being authorised, more action under Article 6 to supply units for Corsia for NDCs as well. So my hope is that all the capacity building work which is happening now and has been happening over the past few years really leads to action in the next six months and beyond. In terms of the registry world, a hot topic at the moment is the ability for financiers such as banks to take a security interest over carbon credits. And this is really key in terms of scaling up finance and funding for projects and increasing that. And there's an important role for registries to play in tracking and supporting that in a legally robust way. In a way it's similar to a bank taking security over a home and they grant a mortgage. This will be significant for channelling funds to project developers and projects. And it's something that we're actively tracking. It feels to me like there's two ways this could go. You could either get this fragmented, disparate market and everybody goes and does their own thing. And that's okay. But actually there's an opportunity here to build a truly global market and at the scale that we need as a planet. And I hope that we can achieve that by working together. You mentioned countries should take a leadership role. Switzerland came to mind because obviously they are probably the ones that are so far least involved in some of the ITMO trades that we've seen. Do you see other countries, especially buying countries, being inspired or recalibrating or rethinking their approaches to Article 6? You have a set of countries who have been signalling for a long time that they are committed to purchasing credits under Article 6. This is an important part of them meeting their national target. Switzerland was the first out of the gate and really did show leadership in how to set up a bilateral agreement. And they're showing some leadership now actually in doing piloting with Norway, Sweden on how to cooperate around carbon dioxide removal credits, which is something we haven't really seen under international markets before outside of the voluntary market. And so there's leadership that they continue to show there. We have buyers in Asia, Japan, Korea, which traditionally have taken quite a kind of specific national approach, may do so again in the future. We've heard from Germany, we've heard from France, we've heard from other countries who are looking at the role that international credits may play for 2040. And why this matters is the size of the market. So if you look at some of the other buyers we have, Singapore, Switzerland, Sweden, the volumes are relatively small that we're talking about there. And they are smaller, for instance, than the Corsica market. But if the EU is looking to purchase under Article 6, the volumes there are much more significant. And that's where you start to see Article 6 scaling up to a level that really may have a material impact on emissions globally. All right, that is all for this episode. We hope you enjoyed it. Now please stay up to date with upcoming episodes by subscribing to Energy Evolution on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you prefer to listen in. If you have any ideas for guests or topics, you can always email energyevolution at spglobal.com. Now before we sign off, I would like to give a shout out to our other podcast team members that includes Taylor Kirkendall, Dan Testa, Camilla Nashert, and Karen Willenbrecht. Also a huge thank you to our agency partner, 199, and the Commodity Insights digital content team. Thank you for listening.


---

