# Exchanges at Goldman Sachs - Master Transcripts

**Generated:** 2025-08-15 16:12:12
**Total Episodes:** 2

Episodes organized by publication date (newest first).

---

## 2025-08-12

### Searching for Signals: BlackRock’s Savi on the Future of Systematic Investing
**Publication Date:** 2025-08-12T04:00:00
**Episode ID:** 5062

**Full Transcript:**
Welcome back to another episode of Goldman Sachs Exchange's Great Investors. I'm Raj Mahajan, a partner at the firm, where I'm responsible for helping to build out the firm's capabilities to serve the systematic investing community. Today, I have the great pleasure of sitting down with one of the stars of our industry, Raffaele Savi, the global head of BlackRock Systematic, which is celebrating its 40th year in the business. Raffaele leads BlackRock's quantitative investing teams across fixed income, equity and factor investing and oversees more than $317 billion in assets under management. He also sits on the firm's global executive committee. We're going to dive into his impact on quantitative investing and explore his perspectives on the growing role of AI and quite timely, get his perspectives on the current tricky moment for the quant industry, given some of the drawdowns that we've experienced. Raffaele, it's a pleasure to welcome you to Great Investors and congratulations on the 40th anniversary. Thank you. I might clarify, I've been with the team for 20 years, so half of this 40th, but the team itself has been serving clients for 40 years and thank you for having me here. Let's just get right to it. Let's start early in your career. You started your career in Italy at Capitalia. I did. You eventually rose to become the CEO of Capitalia Investment Management. Take us back to what drew you to finance in the first place and how did those early experiences in Europe shape your investing philosophy? Yes, it was a little bit of a mix of destiny and intent. I'm an electrical engineer by training and actually I was interested, I was doing my dissertation in remote sensing and then a set of circumstances, I ended up taking a class on derivatives and this was sort of the early 90s and I fell in love with finance and so I decided to do my dissertation on the math of derivatives. There was some coding involved and back then, that was enough to sort of being considered a quant. Today it's much harder for young people entering the field now, I feel, and then I ended up working in the sort of nascent investment management firm in Italy and sort of we were all young and it was another element of luck. They say that you want to be starting your career in a new field sometimes to have the best experience and that's what happened to me. Then in 2006, you joined Barclays Global Investors or BGI, which merged with BlackRock in 2009. What motivated you to move to BGI and then later you stayed at BlackRock post the merger? Tell us more about your thought process in both of those inflection points. Yes. So I left Italy when I was 35, which is a little late. I like to say that sort of I do everything 10 years after the best practice. A lot of people leave Italy to study and then they come back after 10 years in the industry to enjoy the quality of life and I did a little bit the opposite. I worked the first 10 years of my career in Italy and then I moved. It was a personal set of circumstances. I met this woman. She's my wife. She's American. I was in love and she moved to London and so I started cold calling a number of companies and not even in my wildest dream. You cold called BGI? I cold called headhunters. I cold called companies and then I got this offer from BGI and I couldn't believe it because that's for people that are in my field, Grinold and Kahn is the book that we all studied on and so the idea that I could join that firm and work with Richard and Ron, Ron has been a mentor ever since. He's still the head of research of BlackRock Systematic. It's not even in my wildest, wildest dreams and when BlackRock acquired BGI in 2009 in the middle of a lot of change, there was this incredible energy at the front that is still the same if not more intense these days and I think what's special about BlackRock is the firm that constantly reinvents itself, constantly brings together different way of looking at investing, active and passive, public and private, fundamental and systematic and I think if you do investment research and you're trying to figure out how markets work, there's no better place to be. What were some of the early innovations at BGI that you brought to the industry or that BGI pioneered? It's interesting. I joined January 2nd, 2006 so late innings of the first big sort of growth decade for Quants and if you think about some of these strategies, our strategy, our oldest strategy as you were mentioning with the four years was launched in August 1985 so there's a big celebration coming but these strategies, in fairness, didn't really have a lot of tremendous commercial growth for 15 years and then when the 90s were the years of sort of highly concentrated portfolios, the dot-com boom, definitely not traditional Quant strategy material but then these strategies that were based on risk control and sort of diversifying insights did really well in the dot-com bust and in the years after and so they enjoyed tremendous growth up until 2006, 2007. I think a lot of the first version of Quant investing at BGI is what today you would call factor investing and so it definitely has a place in investors' portfolio, it definitely has a place in long-term allocations but sometimes it doesn't have the dynamism to navigate what could be crowding periods like 2007 or a crisis like the GFC and one thing that we've been focusing on with the team was okay, how can we make these strategies less dependent on long-term risk premium, more dynamic, ready for at least to try and take on any environment that one find himself in and then that was if you want the defense part. The offense part was the explosion of big data, machine learning, predictive analytics and the excitement in the team to sort of move in that direction in 2009, 2010 was hard to sort of contain and so that's what happened. In that second wave when post the acquisition by BlackRock, how would you characterize that? Would you say they're refinements to the first set of factor strategies or was there a new class of quantitative strategies that you guys built? I would say more of the latter. It's interesting in some sense, sometimes when you use a new approach whether it's these days is large language models or in the old days it was when big data appeared on the horizon, the first way you convince yourself that you're not delusional is to actually try to replicate prior generation strategy and improve them a little bit and it's only after you gain that conviction that you start really using technology in a free as format and you realize that you can do so much more than build a better value signal or a better quality signal or a better momentum signal. Those effects are prevalent, we call them common factor for a reason, they're common in markets, they're common over time periods, they're common in investor's portfolio but some of these newer technologies have a broader aperture and it took us a while to sort of fully understand that and use it but when I look back now, it's a very different type of sort of thinking and behaviors for the strategies we run. Well, you cracked the door open on large language model as an AI so I'm going to now drive a truck through it and ask you to expand on how is AI impacting your investment approach, there's 320 billion dollars of assets under management, how would you envision over the next few years AI playing a role in either enhancing that strategy or disrupting parts of it? Right, well I think, I mean if you hang out with a lot of the people I hang out with and you know, there's a fair amount of old-time practitioners that are embarrassed by the hype around AI and so this would be the graph people in your team, they will tell you, oh this is statistics or this is optimization, bunch of regressions, right and this is true to it, right. The same time what I think is very interesting are maybe three concepts. So the first one is this concept of scale, there's been this, there's a great paper that's called The Bitter Lesson that basically tells you, hey, you know, you can spend so much time trying to understand everything about a particular problem, maybe it's linguistic, maybe it's predicting sort of companies fundamentals and then you just realize that, you know, if you double the amount of data that you're training your models on or you multiply by ten or a hundred, you can beat any sort of smart sort of adjustment to your model and just more data, more compute leads to better outcome. That's something that I think has to be kept in the background, that sort of, I think our industry relative to many other industries still does not understand this concept in full and I think this concept will play out over the next sort of decade and that's to me the first thing about AI is it's bringing scale as a big driver of success in the investment industry. Okay, scale? Scale. The second part that I think is also interesting is I'm a big fan of generative AI and large language models because I find that they are universal and if you're thinking about deep learning in its previous, pre sort of GPT moment, it was by experts for experts. Even if you have a business person that wanted to apply deep learning in their teams, it was difficult for executives to really feel it. You know, you would ask someone and they would do something complicated and maybe... Use some jargon like neural networks and... Maybe the results were better, but the beauty of this language model is that they are interactive and sort of they speak our language. You can, I can prompt them, you can prompt them, you can get a visceral sense for their capabilities and that I think has broadened the appeal and the applicability and so you can use them in way more parts of your investment process. It isn't just about building a signal, but also you can have a lot more people, a lot of more smart people with great domain expertise. They didn't know how to put it in numbers, but they can do it with an LLM, right? So what I think this is going is that we've seen systematic succeed, you know, the more liquid the asset class and the shorter the time horizon. I think what AI in this generation, in the future architectures will do, will sort of open the door for a systematic approach to investing in longer time horizon and in less liquid asset class. And so I think we'll see systematic in private. We're already doing a lot of work systematic in credit. We're using systematic to sort of translate from macro insights to micro insights. And that's a big, that's a big trend for me. And the third one, I like to think about it as safety engineering. If you're thinking about cars, automotive industries or aeronautics, the cars today aren't any faster than 20 years ago. Airplanes aren't any faster than 20 years ago, but they're much safer. And so here you have two industries that used all the technological innovation in the last two decades to create more safety. And I think sometimes, you know, as soon as we find a new data set or as soon as we find a better algorithm, our first instinct is, you know, can we generate more alpha, right? But there's also, can we build portfolios that are more resilient to shocks? Can we build portfolios that get closer to client desired outcomes, no matter what markets throw it out? So I don't think AI will get us any closer to the crystal ball, but I think it will create layers of safety so that, you know, events will be what they are. They're ultimately unpredictable because the world is beautiful because it's unpredictable. But you give me some money today, you want more money one year from now, three years from now, five years from now, how can we solve that problem better? That's the other application of AI. That's fascinating. So what I heard is scale, safety, and then that second element is moving into less liquid asset classes. Can you just maybe elaborate a little bit more on how systematic approaches to investing are going to be applied to private markets and private investing? Yes, I think it's one of the most exciting areas and I think it's an area that over the next 10 years is going to become the big market. And you know, it's interesting because in the earlier generation of quantitative models, the basic ingredients used for these models were prices, volumes, returns, fundamentals, and analyst estimates. And none of them is readily available for a private company, right? But you fast forward 15 years and the state-of-the-art models today are using a lot of different sources like, you know, product reviews and search trends and Instagram posts and interviews and various forms of sort of human capital network. And all this data is actually readily available for every company. Actually, we realized that we were filtering out a lot of private companies out of these new data sources that we sort of acquired. And so I think that as the models become more data rich, you can build forecasts for any companies, including private companies, right? Then I think the second aspect, again, is there's a lot of interesting portfolio construction and risk modeling challenges that I think are very exciting about what you can do in privates. And if you think about the arc of development of these strategies, again, like quantitative strategies started in equities, shortened for institutions, right? So it was a sophisticated strategy in liquid instruments for institutions. And I think where systematic is going is, is going equities and fixed income and is going for longer duration assets. And AI is the unlock, is the bridge to this when you don't have a time series and volume, but you have more language and text and... Language, images, and AI is a great way to extract information out of these sources that are rational or not tabular. That is what we have in space for public companies, but we don't have it for private. And are you seeing in the midst of all of that data that you're accessing and then applying these AI techniques, are you seeing a signal? Yes. We have products that we developed with colleagues in BlackRock that are in the private equity team that have a traditional fundamental investment approach to private equities, and we've been able to partner and build something new. I think we'll see much more of that in the market in the next 10 years. And there's a lot of assets there. So you could see this have a big impact on your AUM if you get this right. Yes. And I think as we are, as more and more investors and investors have private assets in their portfolios, it will become a more interesting and a more sort of rewarding challenge to figure out how to build an optimal public private portfolio. You know, what kind of risk models we can build that tell us how the whole portfolio will behave relative to a certain shock? What's an optimal deployment strategy? And you know, how do we optimize sort of liquidity profiles while investing across all these asset classes? And these are problems that quants are very well positioned to attack. So I think you have, it's more relevant in clients' portfolios and from a data and an AI perspective, you can build models that are as information rich as the ones you have on public. It's just that, you know, the data is of a different nature. That's very interesting. We're recording this on July 29th, 2025, and I'd be remiss if I didn't at least take a moment to talk about the past seven weeks. It's been a relatively rough stretch for systematic investors after a bumper start to the year. And we've heard lots of theories from retail, surge, broad-based, rally, factor, pressures with high vol, high beta names, short interest. You oversee $320 billion of these assets. You probably have the best panoramic lens into what's really happening right now. Tell us a little bit about what may be causing this drawdown, which by our numbers, you know, could be as high as say 40% from peak to trough. Give us a sense of what you're seeing and enlighten us on what may be causing all of this. Raj, I thought you had the better seat. And that's what we talk about these things. So I'm trying to think what's a good way to share the way we're thinking about it now. I think one way to do so is to say what is the primary feature of this drawdown, right? So if we were sitting back here a year from now, if you invite me again and we look back now, you know, however painful, however long it's resolved, how would we describe it? I would say that the key feature is this sort of high vol names that have been ripping. People have been losing money mostly on their short positions or underweight. And it's been a bit of a collection of some fundamental beats, some meme stocks, some technological breakthroughs, some deregulation hopes. But sort of there's been a high number of, you know, seemingly unconnected high vol names that have done really well. And I think for a variety of reasons, the length of time in which that happened created correlation between slower players and faster players that had been trying to get in on that trade with reversal strategy. And so by mid-July, by July 10 and sort of the 10 days after, the second decade of July, a lot of people were on the wrong side of this high vol names ripping for whatever reason. And usually those events tend to lead to risk management. Sometimes it's mechanical. You might have some leverage limit, you might have some stop losses. Sometimes it's an overlay where people say, whoa, we don't we don't want to lose that much of the year-to-date alpha. And so I think what you've seen in the week before this one was more easily described as sort of selling down positions, closing shorts. That usually happens towards the end of these moves. It's very hard to say is it in six, is it in seven, but usually you have a shock, positions adjust and then sort of markets find an equilibrium. Could there be another shock along the same dimension that happens? Yes, but I think if you just go by history, it does seem that we are towards the end of this move. Yesterday, today, Friday as well were much better days. I hear people have recovered a third to half of that drawdown and you think you've seen everything and then something new happens. There will be another one. You made a really interesting point, which is during this period, if you're in a drawdown and the markets rallied 10%, you have to mechanically degross just to hit a leverage, to have constant leverage. And so you could be just seeing the duration of this be the result of a number of what might be in absolute terms, small degrossings, but in aggregate terms, quite consequential. And I think when you look at sort of some of the technical signals that we sort of developed to try and follow this, again, they weren't particularly loud up until July 15 and then they start picking up that kind of behaviors that again, tends to be signaling that we entered the last legs of this move. To your point also, I think what's interesting is, and you know, I'm an optimist as you probably figured out by now, it's been interesting how many shocks we've seen over the last five years and nothing happened. And so I was actually thinking as we all gotten so much better in risk management, you know, COVID, the inflation shock, you had, you know, that big one day down 14% move in Nikkei last August. Yeah. If you have any of these shocks happening in the 90s or the 2000s, you know, we would have read about hedge fund going under and massive disruption and very little happened. Right. But I think this move over the last five to six weeks is a good reminder that, you know, there's never a good time to be complacent in our industry. And you got to be worried every day. You got to work every day to make your strategies better, to sort of fulfill the promise you made to clients. Well, you mentioned risk management, just tell us a little bit about the risk management approach within BlackRock Systematic. Are there certain lessons learned that you hold everyone to account to and make sure that they're being implemented and monitored daily? Yes. I'll, you know, I think risk management is a combination of two things. One is the systems that you put in place. So one is very... Baked into the code. Yes. It's very numerical. And how much do you invest? How sophisticated are they? How multifaceted are they? How much environmental awareness you're working to build in the system, how intelligent these layers are. But then there's also a philosophy. So how do you feel about, you know, trading off, for example, alpha in a good years versus drawdown protection? Those are design choices. And I think that the better the systems become, the more sophisticated these models become, the more the philosophical part becomes important. You're investing in making your tools and your infrastructure better and better. So you can pick up things, you can design products that have certain behaviors with a higher probability. But what behaviors are you after, right? And there's two quotes. I like these little quotes. One is, you know, Richard Grenold that I quoted earlier one day told me, you know, the best way not to gain 20 pounds is not to gain five pounds. And so, you know, if you're worried about your fund sort of having a big drawdown, then trying to avoid a small drawdown is a good way to start. And that to me means dynamic, action oriented. I think sometimes, you know, there's some sort of more dogmatic approach in the quantitative industries that we don't subscribe to. We, you know, our view is like, hey, what happens, happens. Our job is to deliver alpha to our clients in any market circumstances. So dynamism is important. And then, you know, recently I was talking with a pilot and he said something along the lines of, it's better to be on the ground wishing to be in the air than to be on the air wishing to be on the ground. And that made me think about sort of safety first, right? You know, if it doesn't feel right, if you don't have all the facts, you know, there's always another day. Our clients have a very long time horizon. People are saving for retirement, people are saving for college. You know, if you have a team and an infrastructure and systems that are good at forecasting, that are good at delivering outcomes, you want to have a chance of using them tomorrow, in a week, in a month. So never do anything that will prevent you from doing that, right? And so I think that those choices, as technology becomes better and better, what's going to shape risk management sort of processes and philosophies more what you want to do, what you think is right. You mentioned clients. I know that you spend a lot of time with clients day to day. Can you tell us a little bit about why that's so important to you in your role? And what are some of those discussions like? What are some of the conversations that you're having with clients? I think, you know, I know it sounds a little, it sounds a little soppy and my team jokes about the fact that sometimes I'm a little cheesy and soppy. But you know, this is true. Anyone that is in this industry knows that you get smarter every time you have a client interaction. I never had a client interaction where I didn't learn something. Sometimes a lot, sometimes a little. Some are very pleasant, some are less so, but they own the use case. Ultimately, we manage money. It's not our money, it's their money. And many times it's their ultimate principle money. And that's one big advantage. They really understand what they're trying to accomplish. The second is they see everybody. And no matter how good of a year you had and how sophisticated your team is, there's a lot of really smart people out there that are doing really well, they're doing cutting edge work, they develop organizations with great cultures. And you know, to try and be additive to that, to win business, you know, you need to raise your game. And I think that type of interaction is absolutely necessary. And yeah, I love every second of it. That's well said. You've worked with a lot of the leading minds in the industry over the years. Can you tell us about what are some of the common properties that the very successful systematic investors have had? There's various ways of being successful. You know, when I was younger, I really thought that there was this sort of top cognitive abilities, peak speed was everything. And you know, I still think it's very important, especially for certain parts of what we do of the investment process, the forecasting process, building systems. I think you have to match that with curiosity and open mindedness. And so I found some of the best people, the smartest people I know, the most accomplished people I know are bizarrely open minded on topics they know all about. They've written the books, they've trained generations of sort of professionals and yet, you know, they can have a discussion on that topic, listening to a new opinion, inviting new opinions. That to me is remarkable. That's really cool. Yes. It's that open mindedness combined with sort of the intellect that I think sort of makes miracles. Speaking of getting smarter from spending time with clients, at one of our recent lunches you gave me the, you were describing the industry as a West Coast and East Coast philosophy and you weren't talking about rap music or anything like that. But maybe for the listeners, maybe elaborate a little bit on that model for how you've thought the industry has evolved and what are some of the implications of that? Yes. So this is a little bit along the lines of we shape our destiny, but you know, it also matters where you're coming from. And when you look at quantitative investors, systematic investors, and you know, I'm half jokingly I say that if you could do like a genetic test of everybody in our industry, us or our competitors, the new entrants, the big ones, the small ones, you essentially find two routes. One is a trading desk of investment banks. And that's where sort of the first start up strategies are born from. That's where modern HFT comes from. It was from the origin long short, it was from the origin numerical, and it attracted people with computer science background, hard sciences, physics, math. It had investment in data and technology from the very beginning. It was also interestingly devoid of economics, theory, finance, accounting, corporate strategy, none of that. And that turned out to be the dominant model in hedge fund space. And that's where the DE shows and the Renaissance and the two sigmas and sort of some of the best in that space are coming from. Then, you know, you have the, and I call that the East Coast because, you know, of the New York origin. Actually you can trace a lot of those people coming exactly from investment, you know, maybe having their formative experience on the desk of an investment bank and then starting their firm. And then when you're looking at, you know, what I call the West Coast, University of Chicago. Pharma, French. Pharma, French. Students. DFA, AQI, AQR, Barra, AXA Rosenberg, you know, the Panagoras, the Acadian, a lot of those tend to be much more about starting at least from risk premia, starting from, you know, what today we call factor investing, looking at these anomalies. And these firms ended up dominating in long only. And you know, when you think sort of why that could be, I think that if you have a, if you trade fast, I like to say nothing, nothing, nothing really happens in the next five minutes. And it's not always true, but by and large, you know, the impact of macroeconomic change on the next five minutes is zero. You don't need to think about rates. You don't need to think about GDP. Now, of course, if your time horizon is one year, a lot of things happen over the next year. And a lot of things happens also over the next six months. And so I think it's interesting that, you know, when you're looking at incredibly successful talented firm, when they're trying to move beyond their natural time horizon, they struggle. And then you're trying to say like, but why, you know, they have this incredible system or on the other side, they have these incredible insights. And I think it does come down to a little bit specialization, but also talent. So if you go on LinkedIn and look at what people in these different firms have studied, you'll see to this day that there's this very big dichotomy versus, you know, the hard sciences heavy firms and the economics and finance heavy firms. And the two shall not cross. And we've built a bit of a hybrid. When you actually look at our team, we're this weird 50-50 sort of blend. And the first few years in moving from a pure finance, accounting, economics, to computer science, statistics, math, wasn't easy. So the 2008 to 2012-13 were interesting years culturally for the team, but then we ended up hitting on this very nice blend. I was about to say perfect. It's perfect for me, but- Well, I mean, that was actually one of my next questions is what really differentiates you and BlackRock Systematic, but I think you just answered the question, which was this blend of both approaches. That's super interesting and a great insight. And the thing you're most excited about, which makes it a good opportunity to pivot to the lightning round, I want to ask you in this lightning round, the first question is, we usually ask, what was the first investment you made? But I'll adjust it here. What was the first model you built? Ah, well, I got two stories for you. The early, the Italian part, I remember doing, back then there was no open source. And so you had to code it all up from scratch. And so I remember building a risk model from scratch in- Fortran? In the mid-90s. It was a combination of sort of Matlab and C++, and I was so proud. And people in my team today would laugh at me if they saw it, but back then I was so excited about it. That's cool. Yes. What's your greatest strength as an investor? Oof. I really think I'm only okay at this because I work with fabulous people. And that makes me think that investment seems to be an industry where there's the myth of the lead investor, the person that makes the enormous call. So I listen a lot. I want to learn from the people that I work with and they are fabulous. So maybe relative to other folks in my seat, I do listen a lot. And so I use more of the insights that the people I work with have. And I think that that's a big strength, yeah. It's also very inspiring. What's the best piece of advice you've ever received? If you don't take your work seriously, you can't expect other people to do so. And so when I was younger, I loved ideas. I still love ideas. And discipline has been what I've been working on every year to try and be more and more disciplined about finishing things and delivering. And the older I get, the more disciplined becomes. It's the necessary twin of insight. What investor do you admire the most? I mentioned Richard Greenwald and Ron Kahn a few times, but I got to tell you this little story about them. So one summer when I was finishing my dissertation, I did a six-week Greyhound bus tour of the U.S. And my last stop was New York City. It was the first time I was in the U.S. Started in the West Coast and then... Yes. And that was like mid-90s, late 96, something like that. I went to the bookstore in Union Square where there was the NYU secondhand bookstore. Back then, there was no Amazon and it wasn't like, yeah, I like this book, I'm going to download it from the internet or order it. And I remember browsing the shelves and I picked up Active Portfolio Management, the 1985 edition, blue and purple. And I fell in love. I read it cover to cover. And I've implemented a lot of that in my first job. And then, you know, life is crazy, I ended up working with Ron and with Richard. And what I think that is very special about that is that not only they figure something out like a way to think about investment problems that stood the test of time 30 years later is still as modern and as... But they shared it. And to me, in a world where sometimes, you know, there's a lot of secrecy because you find out a way, you build a piece of code. It's IP. But the idea that you find a really smart, cool, very practical way of generating investment success and you share it with the world, I find it spectacular. And we joke with Ron that that book, you know, made a lot of millionaires in this industry. And sometimes I meet people, competitors, firms, I don't think they say, oh, you work with Ron Kant. Say thank you because, you know, I've implemented a lot of those ideas and they work. That's very cool. I want to move to a couple of personal things, like where do you spend your time when you're outside the office? Family. So I wish, like, you know, the things I like to do the most is spend time with my family, a little bit of exercise and and play guitar. And, you know, in a time series sense, I do all. But I feel that that, you know, I should I could use more time for guitar and and exercise for sure. Last question in the speed round. What are you most excited about in the world right now? I was thinking about something similar a few weeks ago. And, you know, it seems to me that the world people are really worried about a lot of things. And of course, you know, you go online and, you know, the things that happen around us are very scary. But every time you spend time with someone young, the interns come in for a summer internship in the team, youngest team members, you know, my kids, their friends, they are so smart. They're so kind. They are so creative. And I just think we're going to be fine. I think that that's as this cohort makes its way through the workforce and in society and they shape what the world would be. I don't think that we can be worried. And probably there's been like that for every generation. But I'm feeling very optimistic about every time I talk to someone sub 30, I'm like, yeah, the world is going to be a better place. They're going to make the world a better place. Raffaele, that's about a perfect way to wrap things up and very inspiring. And I've had a lot of fun doing this today. So thank you so much for joining us today. Thank you, Raj. Thank you all for listening to this episode of Goldman Sachs Exchanges Great Investors, which was recorded on July 29th, 2025. I'm Raj Mahajan. The opinions and views expressed in this program may not necessarily reflect the institutional views of Goldman Sachs or its affiliates. This program should not be copied, distributed, published or reproduced in whole or in part or disclosed by any recipient to any other person without the express written consent of Goldman Sachs. Each name of a third party organization mentioned in this program is the property of the company to which it relates, is used here strictly for informational and identification purposes only, and is not used to imply any ownership or license rights between any such company and Goldman Sachs. The content of this program does not constitute a recommendation from any Goldman Sachs entity to the recipient and is provided for informational purposes only. Goldman Sachs is not providing any financial, economic, legal, investment, accounting or tax advice through this program or to its recipient. Certain information contained in this program constitutes forward looking statements, and there is no guarantee that these results will be achieved. Goldman Sachs has no obligation to provide updates or changes to the information in this program. Past performance does not guarantee future results, which may vary. Neither Goldman Sachs nor any of its affiliates makes any representation or warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness of the statements or any information contained in this program. And any liability, therefore, including in respect of direct, indirect or consequential loss or damage, is expressly disclaimed. Disclosure is applicable to research with respect to issuers, if any, mentioned herein are available through your Goldman Sachs representative or at www.gs.com slash research slash hedge dot html.


---

## 2025-07-16

### AI Exchanges: Where Will the Power Come From?
**Publication Date:** 2025-07-16 17:32:00+00:00
**Episode ID:** 4482

**Full Transcript:**
Welcome to Goldman Sachs Exchanges. I'm Alison Nathan and I'm here with George Lee, the co-head of our Goldman Sachs Global Institute. Together, we're co-hosting a series of episodes exploring the rise of AI and everything it could mean for companies, investors, and economies. George, good to see you again. Great to be here, Alison. George, I'm very excited for this conversation because today we're going to discuss one of the biggest questions about the rise of AI. Where will the power come from? We know that it consumes enormous amounts of power. That's come up in a lot of our conversations. And in the first episode of the series, I think you said it may be one of the biggest constraints to the growth and development of AI. So let's dig deeper into that. Tell us why that is. There's a temptation to think about AI as this sort of ephemeral phenomenon, the great chatbot in the sky. The reality is this is one of the most physical technology infrastructures ever built. Vast data centers filled with racks of servers and GPUs and other gear. All of that gear requires enormous amount of power and at a scale and density that probably has never been seen in the history of computation before. That coming at the same time of a bunch of other emergent power needs in the world has really made power kind of perhaps the most binding constraint or bottleneck on the delivery of the promises of AI. And probably more interesting, it brings together two very orthogonal populations in our commercial ecosystem, hyperscalers and the fastest moving, most innovative technology companies in the world and highly regulated utilities. And our guest, Rebecca Kruger, stands at the very nexus of those two populations. So it'll be fascinating to have this discussion with her. So let's bring Rebecca into the conversation. Rebecca is a partner in our natural resources group within our investment banking division, which just published a report entitled Powering the AI Era. Rebecca, welcome. Thank you. Thrilled to be here. So Rebecca, in your job, you are talking to leaders in this space, corporate leaders in the space all the time. How is AI dominating those conversations at this point? It's been top of the list to say that AI and the associated power demand has been a focus for our clients is a true understatement. And by the way, the CEOs and the boards of our biggest power companies, they will tell you both privately and publicly, the power demand that they're seeing is unprecedented. And there's no playbook for this. But to understand why that is, because it seems pretty simple, right? AI data centers are getting built, let's just build some power plants. It's actually not that simple. There's a lot that's going into it. So just to set the table for a second, how did we get here? So the last 20 years in the U.S., power demand has been flat. And that's despite a growing economy, despite growing population. We all have more devices that we're plugging in. But offsetting all of that has been offshoring. So we've been shutting down a lot of manufacturing plants in the U.S. That's obviously changing as we try and reshore a lot of manufacturing capacity. And then number two, appliances just got a lot more efficient. And so during those 20 years of when electricity demand was totally flat, a lot of things calcified on that assumption. It was taken for granted that would always be the case. And so energy policy, for example, started to prioritize low emission sources of generation. That's a really good thing. Decarbonizing our economy is a great thing to do. However, intermittent emission-free generation sources like wind and solar are not available all the time. And we're not quite there yet on technology of long duration storage. And so as a result of energy policy, which has really been prioritizing decarbonization, our grid has been getting less reliable. Fewer power plants that can operate 24-7, which is what data centers obviously need. And more power sources that are what we call intermittent. Even before the AI demand story started taking off, participants in the industry were already getting nervous about reliability of the grid. And EV charging was viewed as the straw that was going to break the camel's back because of all the electricity demands that was going to bring. And the grid just wasn't ready. The AI demand story is just a step change in the amount of demand. And so we can get into it in more detail. But the process of getting more megawatts or more power plants online and serving this load is a really complicated issue. And the infrastructure, by the way, is quite old at this point as well. Yeah, that's right. Not only are our power plants in the U.S. quite old, the grid, the actual wires that get electrons from where they're produced to where they're consumed, is on average 40 plus years old and not getting any younger. And the permitting to build new transmission lines is quite time consuming. So how are companies going to meet this increased demand? What is the plan? So like everything in energy land, there is no one size fits all solution. And so we've seen some really interesting partnerships pop up between tech companies and power companies to get more megawatts or more power plants online. So let me give you some examples of that. There are nuclear plants, which amazingly enough, were totally uneconomic and out of the money just a few years ago. They were highly subsidized a couple of years ago. Nuclear plants are exactly what data centers need. It's clean, firm power, 24-7 power. And so we're seeing the hyperscalers partner with some of the owners of these nuclear plants to bring some of them back online. Three Mile Island was a recent headline there. Another option at nuclear sites is there's usually excess land there. And so there's something called up rates. So building more megawatts at an existing nuclear site. So those are some of the low hanging fruit in the sector. You can probably count on one or two hands the number of opportunities that I just described that are out there. There's a lot happening on new construction, but there is a timing mismatch. It takes one to two years to get one of these data centers online. It can take, and I hate to say it, five, ten years plus to get some of this power generation online. The current administration's doing a lot to try and speed that up, the permitting and the siting and all of that. And they're having some success in that, which is great. But it's not just that, it's the supply chain to build out some of these assets is quite backed up. A gas combustion turbine to build a new gas fire power plant, they're sold out until 2030. And so that is what's driving the bottleneck when we say that power is the biggest constraint on data center build out. Fascinating. Let's double click on that, that sort of cadence mismatch between the fast moving hyperscalers, people who want to produce this AI computation and the way that utilities are run, governed, and are subject to the gravity of those very real supply chain constraints. How do you see them navigating that mismatch culturally and temporally? It's been so interesting. So George, you hit this in the intro, which is these two industries, which historically have not had to really interact or work together in a major way. They have two completely different approaches to how they attack their problems. One is move fast and break things. The other is do no harm and I operate under a 30 year planning cycle and my only job is to deliver safe and affordable power. But it's been really fascinating watching these two industries come together to solve each other's problems. And so we can talk more about some of the partnerships that we're seeing there. But the other really exciting thing that's happening is during those 20 years of flat power demand, there wasn't a lot of price signals or incentives for anyone really to invest in R&D, to develop new technologies, or to rethink how we produce and consume energy in this country. That's changing really rapidly. And some of the biggest proponents and funders of it are the hyperscalers. And so one of the examples that I think is most exciting is this concept called peak shaving or making load more flexible. And the grid in the U.S. is built for peak demand. So that one hour in August in Texas when everyone's got their AC on, that peak demand is what the grid is built for because the ACs need to go on, the lights need to go on when people flip the switch. But for so much of the year, there's a lot of unused capacity. And so on the one hand, there's headlines out there saying like, all the lights are going to go out because AI is going to gobble up all the power. It's much more nuanced because there are all these unused megawatts that don't get used for most of the year. And so some of these new technologies or innovations are going to help data centers become flexible demand centers. Yeah. And we've done a lot of work together on this topic. And it implies not only, you know, changes in demand management on your side of the equation, but for the hyperscalers and producers of AI computation, re-instrumenting their algorithms to be able to deal with that intermittency. And we think there's a lot we, I think mutually believe there's a lot of headroom there for sure. The other thing that's very differentiated between the two populations of companies is the quantum of capital available and the way they think about it. These are expensive projects. Talk about how the two populations are coming together to find joint solutions to capital numbers that would have seemed unimaginable years ago to your clients. Well, and these capital projects a few years ago, these numbers would have been unimaginable, but we're talking overall projects, the data center plus the power into the tens of billions of dollars. And what's so fascinating about it is power is just a small fraction of the overall cost of the data center build out, talking maybe 10% of the total cost. But as people who follow the power sector know, the average size of a power company is a small fraction of the size of hyperscalers. And so there's definitely a difference in terms of size and amount of resources, but in some ways it's a great fit. It's like these two puzzle pieces coming together where they both want the infrastructure built. The power companies ultimately want to own it and operate it. It's what they're great at. It's what they're here to do. They have stretch balance sheets, right? These projects and the amount of power they're being asked to build, in some cases doubling what they currently have operating. I mean, that's mind blowing, right? When you think about the fact that it took each of these power companies or utilities 50, 100 years to build up what they have today, they're being asked to double that in the next 10 years. So it's stunning when you think about it. On the other hand, the hyperscalers, they have vast financial resources. And so there's a lot of interesting negotiations and partnerships being discussed and negotiated real time on how can the hyperscalers use their balance sheets and their financial resources to help get some of these assets built. Do we have a generation problem or a transmission problem or both? Yes. Right. I thought that might be the answer. Yeah. I mean, power is a very local or regional industry. It's largely consumed close to where it's produced because there's a lot of what we call line loss as you transmit electrons from where it's generated to where it's ultimately used. And so number one, the concept of citing the user of electricity close to the power plant, it's just more efficient. And in fact, you're seeing what we call more behind the meter generation solutions. So data centers literally citing behind the fence, their data centers right next door to the power plant, right? So we're seeing some of that. That said, we also have some generation assets in pockets of the country that are underutilized today. And so to the extent we can build some new lines to get those electrons from where they're currently underutilized to some load center, that can also help in a really big way. Because again, I said it earlier, there's no one size fits all solution here. It's going to be both more megawatts and more transmission. So you talked about behind the meter, inside the fence scenarios. You also illustrated the challenge of asking companies that have been around for a hundred years to double their capacity in a matter of years. To what extent do the big tech companies and hyperscalers take matters into their own hands and vertically integrate and build capacity themselves co-located with big facilities, particularly in an era where we may see, hopefully see things like small modular nuclear or nuclear fusion. Do you think that'll ensue? So it's possible. It's been interesting watching the journey on the tech side as they started getting very smart. And this is not recent. This has been a journey they've been on for many years, but they've reached a point where they are so sophisticated on energy and they are very effective advocates in DC on energy policy because, as mentioned, it's their biggest bottleneck. And so they care about the policy that's coming out in DC. To date, we have not seen the hyperscalers leaning in to own outright the generation assets that I think they would tell you it's just not their core business. The power companies, that is their core business. And so why mix that up? That said, this is all moving so quickly. And so if they form the point of view that would be a more efficient, faster path to getting the power, maybe. I think a lot of things are on the table. I think longer term, you mentioned SMRs, so small modular reactors, which is an emerging technology of nuclear plants. There is a vision. And so SMRs are around 350 megawatts, which is a good size, an appropriate size for medium, small size data centers, but they certainly can be stacked for larger data centers. There's a vision in the technology sector that maybe, just maybe, as the SMR technology advances, it can be part of the modular construction design for a data center. So a data center has the shell, the SMR, the chips, and you're good to go. So that's some vision for the future. Whether we get there or whether power companies continue to own the assets, time will tell. Is there any concern that we are going to be so focused on build that we're eventually going to overbuild in a sense? I mean, when we think about there's some concern that data centers might get overbuilt. So it's a great question. You know the history of the power sector. There have been many booms and busts, and there's been a lot of capital and money lost on overbuilt cycles. Companies have gone bankrupt. And so what was so interesting about the last, call it 18 months, I actually think the power sector was the last group of folks to believe in this demand story, because I think they had PTSD from the last boom and bust cycles. And so that's shaping the power company's approach to this build out in some really important ways. Data centers and the life cycle of a chip is four years, would you say, George? That's a matter of debate. And it's somewhere between three to six years, depending, probably on the shorter end, in my view. Right. And so therein lies the challenge, right, which is the power plants and transmission lines, these are 30-year assets. And so the last thing a power company wants to do is build this capacity solely for this customer and then be left holding the bag when four years from now the data center is obsolete, right, or not in use anymore. And so it's leading to contracts that we're seeing being struck between the power companies and the hyperscalers on certainly minimum tenors and return on and of capital during the contract tenor. And so the power companies feel good that their investments are being protected and the hyperscalers are getting what they need in terms of the power. And as you turn up the dial on the power price, what does that do to the overall hyperscalers return on the data center complex? It's not much of a needle mover because it's such a small input on the overall cost. And so I mentioned before that it's like these two puzzle pieces that fit really well together. Power companies are very price sensitive. I think a hyperscaler would never tell you they're price insensitive, but they have a little bit more flexibility in terms of what they're able to pay and the terms that they're able to agree to. So interesting. So we've talked about the supply chain constraints to building out this infrastructure. Are there other constraints that we should be focused on? Regulatory constraints or something else that we're missing here that's going to make this even more challenging? So there's a couple all solvable ultimately, but craft labor is one. And so there's a lot of talk of new nuclear getting built. The last nuclear plant that got built in the U.S. at its peak had north of 10,000 workers on site. There's talk of, you know, we are entering the next nuclear renaissance. You can only imagine how many workers just to build out those nuclear plants are going to be required. But even putting nuclear to the side, building out transmission lines, building out gas fire generation, we expect a real effort and advocacy effort from D.C. on pointing people, workers back towards these trades because it's critically important. We are short on labor. And then policy, to your point. And we've seen President Trump, his first day in office, declared a national energy emergency. And so there's been a flurry of executive orders and pushes on policy to streamline permitting, to try and clear the way for new nuclear to get built. And there's many others that have been happening as this administration tries to get more firm baseload power built onto the grid. So what does this all add up to in terms of deal flow in the sector? Yeah. So it's been very, very active, both in terms of M&A and strategic financing. And so on the M&A side, because megawatts and the overall power infrastructure complex is becoming such a more valuable and scarce asset, we're seeing a lot of consolidation. This year alone, we've seen $30 billion acquisition of a large gas fire power portfolio. We've seen a $12 billion acquisition of something similar. So a lot of consolidation happening there. And then in terms of strategic financing, there's a lot of pockets of private capital that are trying to invest to help fund the build out of all of this infrastructure. So we're sitting right in the middle of all of that, trying to match the capital with where it's needed, so that this power can get built as efficiently as possible. Interesting. I mean, as I'm listening to all of this, I think there's just a bigger question here, which is AI going to really drive a transformational shift in the U.S. power grid and landscape, even the global power grid and landscape. Do you see a reshaping of the power landscape off the back of all this? I think a couple comments there. Number one, the U.S. power sector was already under-investing, and there were some reliability concerns that were coming. And so this huge demand story is putting everything front and center all at once, and it's forcing policymakers and every other stakeholder in this big puzzle to focus on these problems and solve them. So that's a good thing. That's a really good thing. And you've got stakeholders across the board on both sides of the table who have deep pockets and deep financial resources throwing their resources at this problem. So that's a good thing for the country, because at the end of the day, reliable, affordable power is a good thing for us as a country. I do expect more innovation. Carbon capture, for example, is getting a lot more focus on investment than it was previously. And so that's basically, take your gas-fired power plants, put carbon capture and sequestration equipment on it, and it lowers the overall emissions of that power plant. That's a great thing, right? And it's a win-win because the hyperscalers ultimately who will be offtakers there, they do care about the emission content of their power. Maybe the last thing I'd say on this is, I think fundamentally how we can produce and consume energy in this country is going to be changing. Over the last 20 years when we had flat demand growth, there wasn't the price signals that really triggered and motivated innovation. We are seeing that in spades today, and it's really exciting time as a result. So interesting. Thanks again for joining us, Rebecca. Thanks for having me. This was terrific. Great discussion as anticipated. And I want to feature the thing that Rebecca ended with, which I think there is an optimistic frame. There are real challenges here. You have regulated utilities who own fealty and obligation to rate payers. There's a lot of concern about continuity and price of electrons for them. This is clearly a generational challenge to meet this need. And yet you are interposing a set of entities that are the most innovative tech forward entities in the world. They now can turn their attention to bringing more efficiency, more change, more new ideas to this older ecosystem. And I think it promises the potential as your question signaled for a very high rate of change in this kind of slow-moving ecosystem in the next five to 10 years. Frankly, we'll need it. Absolutely. Couldn't agree more. I mean, bringing innovation to this sector, it's got to be a win-win. But to their credit, and as Rebecca mentioned, really responding, partnering well with these companies. This is not a population of companies who are burying their head in the sand. They recognize the opportunity, the need, and I think they're really rising to meet the challenge. Pretty inspiring, actually. Absolutely. Well, thanks again, George. I am looking forward to our next conversation. As am I. Thank you. This episode of Goldman Sachs Exchanges was recorded on Wednesday, July 9th. To learn more about this topic, you can find a link to the report, Powering the AI Era, in the show notes. I'm Alison Aythen. Thanks for listening. The opinions and views expressed in this program may not necessarily reflect the institutional views of Goldman Sachs or its affiliates. This program should not be copied, distributed, published, or reproduced in whole or in part, or disclosed by any recipient to any other person without the express written consent of Goldman Sachs. Each name of a third-party organization mentioned in this program is the property of the company to which it relates, is used here strictly for informational and identification purposes only, and is not used to imply any ownership or license rights between any such company and Goldman Sachs. The content of this program does not constitute a recommendation from any Goldman Sachs entity to the recipient, and is provided for informational purposes only. Goldman Sachs is not providing any financial, economic, legal, investment, accounting, or tax advice through this program or to its recipient. Certain information contained in this program constitutes forward-looking statements, and there is no guarantee that these results will be achieved. Goldman Sachs has no obligation to provide updates or changes to the information in this program. Past performance does not guarantee future results, which may vary. Neither Goldman Sachs nor any of its affiliates makes any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness of the statements or any information contained in this program, and any liability, therefore, including in respect of direct, indirect, or consequential loss or damage, is expressly disclaimed. Disclosures applicable to research with respect to issuers, if any, mentioned herein are available through your Goldman Sachs representative or at www.gs.com slash research slash hedge dot html.


---

