# Global Evolution - Master Transcripts

**Generated:** 2025-08-15 16:12:12
**Total Episodes:** 2

Episodes organized by publication date (newest first).

---

## 2023-12-15

### S03E02 Carbon capture and storage | The Global Energy Transition Podcast
**Publication Date:** 2023-12-15T10:40:00
**Episode ID:** 5071

**Full Transcript:**
Hello and welcome to the Global Energy Transition podcast, presented by the Heinrich Boll Stiftung European Union and the Global Energy Transition blog. I am your host, Michael Buxbaum, energy photojournalist and lead blogger for theenergytransition.org, recording here in the heart of Madrid's Mala Saña district. As we wrap up this podcast, the good news has come across that in 2023, Germany produced more than half its electricity from renewables, showing that as more renewables come online, we can hopefully reduce overall CO2 emissions. And with emissions from oil and gas rising at the recently concluded COP28 in Dubai, one strategy which got tremendous attention, in fact, the preferred and promoted strategy by the fossil fuels industry to combat climate change, is to capture a significant amount of those emissions either before they go into the atmosphere or directly from the atmosphere, and then somehow, somewhere, store that CO2 underground or offshore, perhaps forever. This concept of capturing CO2 before it goes up into the atmosphere, often from point sources, is called carbon capture and sequestration, or carbon capture and storage, or in short, CCS. At COP28, the conference's president, who also serves as CEO for the Abu Dhabi National Oil and Gas Company, or ADNOC, along with 50 other industry executives, signed the Oil and Gas Decarbonization Charter. This charter focuses on using CCS to, quote, abate or divert CO2 from going to the atmosphere without necessarily stopping the burning of fossil fuels, which causes these CO2 emissions in the first place. Signatories of this pledge pledged to reach net zero by 2050 for their operations by using, quote, low carbon technologies like carbon capture and utilization and storage, or CCUS, with the U, as I said, standing for utilization, or maybe they will use instead low carbon hydrogen, aka hydrogen made from fossil gas, with CO2 from refining it being buried via CCS, sometimes called blue hydrogen. I know, lot of acronyms, sorry about that. But today, there are less than 45 commercial CCS projects operating worldwide, and they have a combined capacity to capture barely 15 million tons of CO2 annually. Yep, that's about 0.1% or less of the roughly 37 billion tons of annual CO2 that is spewing the atmosphere from industry. According to the International Energy Agency, an inconceivable 32 billion tons of carbon capture would need to be out there to capture the CO2 that is going out by 2050 if we're going to limit climate change to 1.5 degrees Celsius. Not only would powering this amount of carbon capture exceed the total global electricity demand currently, it would also require over 3.5 trillion dollars in annual investments up to 2050, along with the build-out and construction of hundreds of thousands of kilometers or miles of new dedicated CO2 pipelines to take captured CO2 from the thousands of to-be-built CCS facilities and bury it somewhere. Essentially, relying on carbon capture to solve our emissions problem would require building out the entire existing oil and gas industry in 20-odd years and then essentially running it in reverse. Sounds crazy, right? But nevertheless, in 2023, the European Union set a goal of having 50 million tons of CO2 storage capacity by 2030 and they are aiming to obligate emitters to make this happen in time. The UK has also likewise set a 30 million ton target by 2030. Problematically, outside of Norway, hardly a million tons of CO2 is being captured throughout all of Europe. Regardless, worldwide, there are hundreds of new CCS projects being built or in advanced planning. To be honest, CCS is one of my favorite subjects, one I've written about quite extensively over the years for the Energy Transition and more lately with my writing partner Edward Donnelly for DSMOG. And on top of this, he and I both won a grant from the journalism fund EU to conduct a deep dive into carbon capture and its planned build-out throughout Europe, so look for that series to be published throughout 2024. For background, I'm going to link into the show notes some of the past stories I've written about CCS, including two I published in September for DSMOG. But here is perhaps the most important part of the CCS story. Key to understanding carbon capture is how that CO2 is stored. What the tech backers rarely emphasize and what the media rarely spotlights is that by far and away, most of the carbon being captured today is stored in a way to produce more oil. Nope, not a joke. Of the approximately 50 million tons of CO2 now being captured annually, over 35 million is used to produce, to squeeze out more oil from the ground through a process industry calls Enhanced Oil Recovery, or EOR. Though there are several CCS operations in Norway, Australia, even in Iceland, the world's biggest projects are located in the United States, Canada, and Brazil. And by far and away, the majority of the CO2 they are capturing is being used for EOR. ExxonMobil, the world's largest private oil and gas major, is not only one of the pioneering EOR companies, it also proudly claims to have the most experience with CCS or carbon management than anybody else. At least 5% of daily U.S. oil production is generated by injecting CO2 into declining or otherwise depleted oil and gas fields, or oil fields in this case. So that means over 600,000 barrels a day out of the U.S. alone is being produced from CO2 that is being captured from somewhere. And an increasing amount of global production, global oil production, at least 2% to 3% more on top of what's happening in the U.S., is coming from using CO2 for EOR. Still less than 10% of global oil production, but the truth of it is, it's all that has stopped industry from doing more enhanced oil recovery has been the lack of a steady stream and steady supply of CO2. And as we turn to carbon capture and storage as a climate solution, they're about to get exactly that, steady stream of CO2. CCS is a complicated subject. For this episode, we are going to talk with David Schlissel, Director of Resource Planning Analysis for the Institute of Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, or IEFA. An attorney and consultant and one of IEFA's founders, for decades David has served as an expert witness before regulatory commissions in more than 35 U.S. states and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. I started our interview a few months ago by asking David if it's true that most captured CO2 is really being used to produce more oil. Yes, 73% of the CO2 that's been captured in recent years has been used for enhanced oil recovery, which means that the CO2 is compressed and injected underground to force out oil that otherwise either wouldn't be recoverable or would be very difficult to recover. Essentially, when you have an oil deposit, you have primary development, which means you extract oil using the native pressure underground, and that pushes the oil to the surface. Then oftentimes producers will go back again and quote unquote re-stimulate that deposit, re-pressurize it to get more oil out, so-called secondary development. But then most producers leave and go on to the next find. What that means, though, is that in many oil fields, something like 40 to 60% of the oil that was underground prior to discovery remains there. Industry calls those then depleted oil fields. One of the most effective ways to get lots of that remaining oil, residual oil, to the surface is through so-called tertiary development, like EOR, enhanced oil recovery, particularly by injecting CO2 into it. There are other forms of EOR, no doubt. Polymers, methane is used even in certain situations. Water flooding works too. But the most effective way to get residual remaining oil out of these reservoirs is by injecting CO2 under pressure into it. Oil companies started doing this 50 years ago in the early 70s back in Texas. And all along, to some extent, they've been using natural deposits, the CO2 from natural deposits in the ground, to squeeze out as much oil as they can from underground. Rule of thumb is that for about every one metric ton of CO2 that is injected underground, you force up another two barrels of oil. It depends on where you're doing it. I've seen numbers that in some places you can get three to four barrels of oil. A barrel of oil produces roughly 0.44% of a metric ton of CO2. So if you're producing and burning a little over two barrels of oil, you are basically recreating the metric ton that you've used to create the new barrels of oil. The numbers are a little sketchy, but it's fair to say that a significant portion of the CO2 that's captured and otherwise would have been emitted into the atmosphere gets emitted by the additional CO2 from the burning of the extra oil that's produced through EOR. That explains why nearly every time I've asked folks from the oil and gas industry about this, they try to move away from the EOR conversation. And on top of that, it's not at all clear that the facilities that do carbon capture, regardless of how they store their CO2, it's not at all clear that they are grabbing 100% of the CO2 that they are producing. Projects generally have been promoted as they capture 90% or more of the CO2 that they produce. Generally supporters of carbon capture talk about how much is captured, but they don't talk about how much these plants produce. Capturing 40 million tons is good performance if these 30 projects, or how many, are producing 32 million tons. So capturing 30, so there's only 2 million going in the air. It's not so good if they're producing 70 million tons of CO2. So there's a lot still going into the air. We don't see that data, or I should say we only see it for a couple of projects. And for those, they have not achieved the 90% goal. So we really don't know how much CO2 is actually being captured, even though the majority of CCS projects are either attached to a gas-fired power plant, a gas refinery, or a coal-fired power plant? No, I gotta correct you there. There are none attached to gas-fired power plants. Generally, it's gas processing, so that they take natural gas that's produced and clean up the impurities that are in it, like the CO2, and then pipe it off for use somewhere else. There were two coal plants, one in Texas in the U.S. and one in Saskatchewan in Canada, that for three-and-a-half years, roughly, three-and-a-third years, were capturing CO2 and using it for enhanced oil recovery. Then, sorry, the carbon capture facility called Petra Nova was shut down in Texas at the end of April, early May of 2020. Now, I should note, since we recorded this, Petra Nova, starting in September, late September 2023, is back online and capturing CO2. Nevertheless, the facts that David relates are still accurate. It was an existing large power plant, roughly 610 megawatts of capacity, and Petra Nova was capturing the CO2 from roughly 40% of the flue gas coming out of WA Parish Unidate facility owned by a company called NRG. This is outside of Houston. It was a demonstration project. It cost a billion dollars. The U.S. government put in $160 million. The industry touts Petra Nova as a great success for showing that carbon capture or capturing 90% or more of the CO2 produced by a plant can be captured. They produced a final study for the U.S. Department of Energy that proponents of CCS says, well, it's a DOE study, but it wasn't. It was a study by NRG for the DOE and to no surprise, NRG claimed their project was successful. Only the numbers they put into their report don't allow you to reach that conclusion. The key metric for a carbon capture project is obviously how much CO2 it captures in tons, but also what's important is its capture rate. What percentage of the CO2 it produces does it capture? And while for Petra Nova they claimed how many tons of CO2 they'd captured, they didn't indicate how efficient it was. They just claimed it captured 93%, I think, or 92.7% of the CO2 that was treated by the carbon capture facility or processed through it, but they didn't tell you how many tons were processed through it. So you can't verify that they're 93% is accurate. Indeed, there were a lot of questions about how often the project ran. There were many technical challenges to Petra Nova and the CCS plant itself was often down. But to power the CCS project, they actually built another dedicated power unit. Even though the facility or the unit it's attached to is a large coal unit, they built a dedicated combustion turbine to run the carbon capture equipment. The carbon capture equipment requires a lot of power to run it, and it's called a parasitic load because that power is not otherwise available to sell into the market because it's needed to run the carbon capture equipment and other internal plant equipment. And they didn't capture the CO2 from that turbine, and they did not, when they talk about capturing 92% of the CO2, they don't include the CO2 from the combustion turbine that powered the project. They don't include the methane that was emitted during the mining of the coal that was burned. They don't include the fact that the captured CO2 was used for enhanced oil recovery. Even if you accept their 90% to a 92% capture rate, if you add in just the combustion turbine, that drops down to about 75 to 80% capture rate. Though it's not quite clear how much carbon they were capturing, what we do know is that none of what's been reported includes the CO2 stemming from the oil Petra Nova was producing through EOR and then is later burned. Correct. I mean, they produced 5,000 barrels of oil a day, I think is the number, on average. And that oil, when burned, would produce slightly less than a metric ton of CO2. Officially during Petra Nova's operation from 2016 through 2020, it captured roughly 3.8 million tons of CO2. Though critics like David question its success at actually capturing CO2, unquestionably Petra Nova excelled at producing more oil. Captured CO2 is compressed, transported via an 81-mile pipeline, and then injected into the West Ranch oil field in Jackson County, Texas. During Petra Nova's first run, captured CO2 used for EOR caused production there to jump from 300 barrels a day to at times more than 6,000 barrels a day. And while the plant succeeded at capturing less than 4 million tons of CO2, that CO2 helped produce another 4.2 million or more barrels of oil. And when Petra Nova shuttered, it wasn't because of any real failures to capture CO2, it was because low oil prices made running the plant uneconomical. Let's talk a little bit about another benchmark project, Boundary Dam in Canada. It's also attached to a coal-fired power plant. It's originally supposed to capture 90% of the CO2 it produced. That dropped to 85 pretty soon. Then the goal dropped to 65% of the CO2 it produced. By our calculations, it's capturing somewhere between 50 and 55% of the CO2 that it produces. And the CO2 that Boundary Dam captures then goes for enhanced oil recovery as well. Some portion is stored underground without EOR, but they do sell a lot for EOR. So just next door to Alberta in their oil field. Yes. David, you're not selling me so far on CCS being a climate-saving concept. Well, you're smart. You're paying attention. The claim of proponents is that you'll capture the CO2, you'll pipe it somewhere, and you'll put it underground where it will stay permanently. That's what they claim. And we say the technology has failed to achieve its goals in many projects. That it will be very expensive to do this. That it will have to be monitored for leaks for hundreds of years. And that you have... The fourth is you have to do a life cycle analysis. Because when the natural gas, assuming you're going to run, it's for a natural gas-fired power plant, there's, you use the term, which is the correct term, fugitive emissions from production. Which means that some of the methane goes into the air rather than into pipes. Same thing, there's leakage from piping to the power plant. You need to do a life cycle analysis, upstream and downstream emissions. I've been critical of the U.S. Department of Energy, even under the Biden administration, for their desire to promote CCS so quickly because they see it as necessary to decarbonize the world. And I just think it's a gimmick technology to keep the natural gas, coal, and oil industries going. But there's another reason why these types of projects are so popular in the U.S. and why so many more are being planned there. In 2022, President Biden and his administration and Congress approved the Inflation Recovery Act, or IRA, which gives $391 billion in funds earmarked for new energy development and to fight climate change. And Biden and much of the media has said that this is the largest green energy subsidy in the world, or in world history. But there's also a lot of money and special tax breaks in there for carbon capture. In fact, expanded and higher tax breaks under something called 45Q for both carbon that is captured and sent into geological storage. And also EOR is there. They're getting a lot more money. So now Exxon and others will get more money to produce more oil. Right. You've got it. The old 45Q that's now been superseded by a revised 45Q. And that refers to the section of the IRS code. The credit was $50 per metric ton of CO2 stored underground, $35 per metric ton for every ton that was used for enhanced oil recovery. So $50 a ton for geological storage and $30 a ton for EOR. Right. And now it's gone to $85 per metric ton for geologic storage and $60 per metric ton for enhanced oil recovery. So I took a look recently at sales prices for West Texas crude oil or crude oil that falls under or sold under that benchmark. Prices did jump to over $90 a barrel in September of 2023 and are now back down to over $70 plus. But let's say I'm an oil company and I can earn about $70 per barrel. Using EOR, I can probably produce two barrels of oil for every metric ton of CO2 I put underground. So that's $140. And then I add another $60 more on top of that. So I'm Exxon and you're telling me, rough estimate of course, that I have the potential of using CCS attached to EOR to make around $200 for every metric ton of CO2 I put underground. Right? That's correct. You have no incentive to stop producing oil or CO2. My colleague Dennis Womstead, who works with me on the carbon capture, we refer to power plants that would be converted to have carbon capture as CO2 factories, that the production of electricity is secondary. The real point is to produce and capture as much CO2 as possible because of the revenues coming from the 45Q credits. And as you describe it, using it for enhanced oil recovery just increases the amount of money they would get, assuming oil prices remain high. These power plants will become CO2 factories and their owners will get a lot of money for the CO2 they capture so that they will make profits even if they capture a far less than they claim they will capture. David and I, I have to confess, spent about two hours chatting about CCS for this podcast. The topic is just so big and complicated. And there's still so much more that could be addressed, like CCS's role in hydrogen production and how CCS is evolving outside of North America. But for that, we'll just have to do other podcasts as we're getting just too close to time here. Now, personally, first of all, thanks, David, for spending time with me and explaining all this. I totally understand why he and others and other critics of carbon capture see it as a false solution in terms of how it could or will help solve the longer term climate crisis. But it's definitely not a crazy idea. Carbon capture is definitely not a crazy idea if you are looking at it from the perspective of the oil and gas industry, which we should note has been the driving force behind a lot of this conversation. To be fair, in Europe, a lot of the debates and the regulations that are being developed around CCS, officially at least, are about industrial decarbonization. So putting it onto cement or steel or concrete or other plants, and not about using CO2, the captured CO2 for EOR. Though as we investigate further, it's not at all altogether impossible. In fact, a lot of the CO2 that's going to be captured will be stored in so-called depleted oil and gas fields. And those barrels of oil, as we know, are just sitting there waiting to be produced. All that is preventing that oil from coming to the ground or coming out of the ground and up to the surface are some very thin paper barriers and public pressure, which is where you, dear listeners, come in. I want to thank all of you who've tuned in and stayed tuned in to this CCS podcast. You have been listening to the Energy Transition Podcast, a product of the Heinrich Wohl Stiftung's Energy Transition platform. Thanks to the Energy Transition team in the EU office in Brussels. And thanks also for Gita for your amazing edits and for putting all of this together. From lively Malasaña in Madrid, I wish you all smooth sailing on what could be rough seas ahead. Until next time.


---

## 2023-10-26

### S03E01 From Coal to Renewables | The Global Energy Transition Podcast
**Publication Date:** 2023-10-26T12:47:48
**Episode ID:** 5072

**Full Transcript:**
Hello and welcome to the Global Energy Transition podcast, presented by the Heinrich Boll Stiftung European Union and the Global Energy Transition blog. I am your host, Michael Buxbaum, photojournalist and lead blogger for theenergytransition.org. The international response to Russia's brutal February 2022 invasion of Ukraine has altered and transformed the energy transition, in some ways accelerating the move towards wind and solar generation, but also forcing countries dependent on Russian fossil fuels, particularly European nations and the European Union as a whole, to search for and secure alternative supplies. As our team of bloggers at the Energy Transition are broadly covering, the sudden shocks of this new reality largely exacerbated the already growing triple crisis of climate, energy and inflation that we continue to face. For decades, renewable energy proponents have advocated for the transformation of aging or abandoned coal mines and coal-fired power plants into green energy centers. After 200 plus years of industrialization, the reality is there are so many places worldwide where industry has moved on, leaving blighted brownfields in their wake. Once a source of greenhouse gases, many old mines and abandoned ones remain wired to the energy grid. Being granted a grid connection is increasingly becoming a challenge for new solar farms and green energy centers. Additionally, local opposition to building new power lines can be both costly and controversial. In that sense, closed mines and power plants are already tied to the grid and converting them rarely faces a challenge. What's more, these old industrial sites often still have substations which help convert electricity to a supply that's suitable for use in homes and businesses. After years of covering the international coal scene through about 2015 for a variety of industry publications, and in the process traveling to hundreds of coal mines and power plants and import and export facilities worldwide and spending far too much time underground, the coal conversion narrative is something that I have long been following. Colorado's Rocky Mount Institute, which had for decades advocated for such transformations, started tracking projects globally through their Sunshine for Mines initiative, publishing their first findings in 2015. In their first report, they listed the handful of such carbon reduction developments on mine sites worldwide, which, at the time, had only come to about 600 megawatts of cumulative capacity. I also first wrote about several lighthouse developments and the potential for more in 2015 in a pair of articles for both Mining Magazine and later Power Magazine following a trip I made to the pioneering Glenrock Wind Farm in the American state of Wyoming, the first wind farm to be constructed on reclaimed mine land. Located on the former Dave Johnston Surface Mine near Casper, Wyoming, walking along its rolling green high prairie land, you would never know that over the course of 42 years, over 104 million tons of coal have been extracted right there and burned nearby to produce electricity. After going into operation in 2008, Glenrock has grown to be a much larger wind farm now capable of producing almost 250 megawatts of clean power. A couple of years after the Glenrock facility was coming together, on the other side of the world, in Germany, a consortium of German and Chinese developers had proudly completed construction of an 11.6 megawatt solar farm on a former strip mine in central Germany. At the time, it was a pretty large coal-to-solar conversion. Now a decade later, developers not too far away from that first site are getting closer to completing a 650 megawatt coal-to-solar conversion, which may become the largest single solar farm in Germany when it starts producing in 2024. By 2019, RMI's list of coal conversions was just getting too long, as renewables on coal sites have begun generating almost 5 gigawatts worldwide. But now, a few years later, that's just a fraction of what's happening. Simply put, since 2008, coal production in the United States has more than halved, and outside of China and India, few other nations are still clinging to coal. And that downward trend, the International Energy Agency now says is becoming unstoppable. While we might like to think that this decline is only happening out of concern over the climate, there's actually a lot more at play, particularly geology. The reality is that after 200 years or so of mining, the easiest coal to reach is long gone, and the best of the rest is being mined every day, and thus a bit more depleted. Now for the most part, new studies show that what coal remains today is more expensive to mine, it's more expensive to transport, and thus more expensive to burn compared to the falling prices of new solar and wind generation. Combined with the rising costs of carbon credits in the EU or other regional regulations, for many countries and many electricity producers, there's simply less economic sense to stay with coal. However, what does make increasingly more economic sense is to reinvest in and repurpose abandoned, closed, or closing coal mines and power plants into renewable energy centers. And while energy developers had already been moving in this direction, Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine and the energy price shocks that followed have accelerated the coal to solar and renewables trend worldwide. Throughout the EU, converting coal mines and power plants into renewable energy sites became a key plank within the New Repower EU strategy adopted as a way to help speed the EU's move away from imported Russian gas and LNG. And the war has helped spur renewables development across the 27 member states. In 2022, for the first time, wind and solar reached over a fifth, 22%, of EU electricity generation. According to climate think tank Ember, the 41 gigawatts of new solar capacity that came online helped avoid some 10 billion euros in additional gas costs. And all that solar, plus new wind coming online coupled with a fall in electricity usage prevented a much larger return to coal throughout the EU. Looking ahead, solar and wind adoption is now moving so fast that the IEA says renewables will surpass coal's share around the globe by 2025. In cooperation with the NGO Europe Beyond Coal, during the summer of 2022, I conducted a really long survey of coal-to-wind and solar projects that were ongoing or had already happened throughout Europe. This led me to another fresh report on this subject, published by The Green Tank, an Athens-Greece-based environmental NGO, which looked through this subject through a just transitions lens. And so, for this episode of the Energy Transition Podcast, we're going to talk about this excitingly rapid uptake of new renewables and solar development on old or abandoned coal mining lands with one of the authors of The Green Tank's report, Nikos Montazaris. We'll link The Green Tank's report and several recent blogs I've written on coal-to-renewables into the show notes. These blogs, like all the material we publish, falls under a Creative Commons license and are therefore free for anyone to use, so long as you credit the material. Stay with us. Transitioning from coal to clean energy is a subject we've touched upon several times in our blogs and podcasts, such as in the Romanian Power Move series, where I covered how this Eastern European nation is planning to install solar arrays inside several state-owned lignite mines as part of its EU-funded energy transition. And more recently, we've written about how Colombia, South Africa, and other nations across the Global South are also developing coal-to-solar and wind projects. But one nation where new solar is rapidly being developed in and around existing coal operations is Greece. To help us get perspective on this surprisingly happy story, I spoke to Nikos Montazaris, partner and senior analyst with the environmental NGO Greentank, and one of the authors of their inspiring report, Just Transition in Practice, Sustainable Projects in Coal Regions. Now it's fair to say that this report, which details about 50 or so projects, is a bit Greek-heavy. But that makes sense when you realize how quickly developers are transforming the Greek region of Western Macedonia, the traditional lignite mining area of the country. Evidence of this? Last October, for several hours, the entire nation of Greece ran solely on renewables. And given how much new solar is coming online, the nation is now on track to reach its 2030 solar capacity target of 8 gigawatts by the end of this year, 2023, a full 7 years early. To open our conversation, I asked Nikos what prompted Greentank to research and publish this study. First of all, the motivation for this report was twofold. First, it's the fact that the development of the so-called territorial just transition plans, the prerequisites for getting funding for coal-region transition, member states getting funding for coal-region transition, this is progressing very slowly, and it's very opaque, mostly at the national but also the EU level. Thus, there is the threat of dangerous investments sneaking in and materializing at the expense of other much-needed projects that would benefit citizens of coal regions more. At the same time, there is the additional threat of delaying the just transition process even further because of all this planning for a temporary, as they say, comeback of coal in several EU member states. The second part for our motivation was that now we have a new energy reality and new challenging goals as expressed by the Repower EU plan. However, we don't have new funds. Thus, it's more urgent than ever to channel the funds of the just transition mechanism that the EU created for coal-region transition mainly, but other regions as well. And to channel these funds, the correct investments, in a fashion that is fully aligned with the Repower EU plan. For these two reasons, and in an effort to contribute towards truly sustainable territorial just transition plans, we researched the very rich just transition experience in the EU, especially as it was showcased in the coal-region transition platform established in 2018. We followed this very closely. This was later named just transition platform. What we did is we separated the sustainable projects and best practices that were presented there from the non-sustainable ones, and we presented them in seven categories. Sustainable, of course, a version of those that really take home message is that we have a lot of projects on the ground that are moving in the right direction, which shows that really just transition seems impossible, especially for citizens in coal regions. It's very, very doable, very possible if we put our minds together. I mean, there are excellent examples around the EU, which shows that the feasibility of just transition. The Green Tanks report reviews several case studies throughout the EU, though Greece gets quite a bit of attention, and rightly so. In mid-2022, Generation started at what at the time was the largest single PV plant in Southeastern Europe, the 204-megawatt Kozani project located in Western Macedonia. Built in large part by the Greek state-owned coal and electricity producer Public Power Company, or PPC, I asked Nikos to explain how Kozani has become something of a lighthouse project. To me, the lighthouse aspect of this project, again, is not the technology. A is the scale, 2.5 gigawatts out of a total of four already installed in Greece is a huge percentage, a huge share. But the most important aspect of this is the turnaround, the very silent and quiet turnaround of one of the dirtiest companies in Europe, the Public Power Corporation. In 2019, PPC was addicted to coal, was losing money of it, was addicted to coal, no plans for PVs, no plans for wind, etc. And they are planning on installing a huge amount of capacity until 2024, mainly in the United Regions, but not just in the United Regions. They want to invest there. They actually have signed three sustainability imports, a total amount of 1.275 billion euros, linked with very ambitious goals of cutting greenhouse gas emissions from thermal plants. So they really are trying to put their money where their mouth is. They want to invest in renewables. This turnaround was the most impressive aspect of this, and lignite regions in Greece are right at the center of PPC's change of its energy model. I asked Nikos to put Greece's and Western Macedonia's Lignite to Renewables plan in context, describing why and how we got here. Yes, Western Macedonia is a key energy region for Greece. It has been burning lignite since the 1950s, so we're talking about seven decades of lignite use. It has reached the point in the late 90s and early 2000s where power from Western Macedonia covered approximately 70% of electricity needs in Greece. And if you include the other lignite regions in the south of Greece, then you would say that lignite had a share of 80% of electricity demand. Since the early 2010s, it became gradually apparent that the future of lignite in Greece was in jeopardy because it has very low quality and it's mostly influenced by any kind of change which has an economic effect because of the low quality of lignite. I'm talking about directives, the industrial emissions directive and the emissions trading system directive. This, essentially after the Paris Agreement, have really escalated. With other PV projects under construction, in early 2023, Greece's PPC secured an additional 100 million euros plus in financing to support the construction of another 230 megawatts of PV, also to be constructed in Western Macedonia near the operating Kozani plant. Though this project will also be financed in part by the European Union's Next Generation EU funds under the Recovery and Resilience Facility Plan, Greece 2.0, PPC will also be developing this PV project in partnership with friend of the podcast and German energy behemoth RWE, also known as Europe's most climate damaging company. Given how much criticism I and others give RWE, perhaps it's only fair that we also recognize when they are transitioning better, so to say. I asked Nikos about why PPC would choose to work with RWE in this situation. Yes, it's supposed to be close. We don't know exactly the site, by the way, but there are plans that RWE is going to collaborate with PPC to develop a one gigawatt PV panels, PV parks of a total capacity of one gigawatt. I think this is a wonderful idea. Though in the last three years, PPC has taken huge strides towards becoming a financially sound company by moving away from Ignite, loss making Ignite, and investing in Robos, it still does not have the capacity to do it all on its own, and it wants the help of bigger companies such as RWE. That is why RWE is co-developing with PPC this one gigawatt of solar in Western Macedonia, because PPC needs the help. Back in Germany, of the various solar projects now being built on former mine land, one is a huge 650 megawatt facility, enough to power 200,000 average households. News reports show it's on track to begin generating by the end of 2023. I asked Nikos about the relationship between Kozani and these types of German projects. Well, I would definitely highlight Kozani, because it's truly, truly impressive. There are existing and much older projects around the EU. Germany is another very good example, but then of course, Germany. For Germany, this is not that pioneering because it has been pioneering PVs since the 2010s. Germany is largely responsible for having those low prices globally, so it's not a big surprise that Germany is installing large PVs in Ignite mines. I consider this a given, whereas in Greece, where we have around four gigawatts of PV capacity to install more than 2.5 gigawatts just in two mining sites, that's far more impressive. Would you say that these are all projects that could become models for other areas too? Yes, I would say that these are kind of lighthouse projects, in my opinion, and particularly suitable for Ignite regions, not just in Greece, but other coal regions, Ignite regions in particular, with open pit mines in Europe. What about reusing and redeveloping existing coal-fired power plants into batteries or thermal storage centers? Thermal storage is a different technology where you exploit the pre-existing infrastructure that otherwise is going to be demolished or left unused, etc. You can use this very rich infrastructure that does not only involve the turbines, it involves also the grid connecting the Ignite plant with everything, but use it for storage purposes. So that, I would say, is a very good example of what can be used in coal regions, and it's common, I would say, in Ignite mining regions across the EU. To convert Ignite plants to thermal energy storage facilities is really an option. And last but not least, you keep jobs in the Ignite industry, which is a main prerequisite of any process, any just transition process in any country in the world, in reality, because you keep all the jobs you have in the Ignite plant, plus other jobs for the storage sector. Of course, you miss the Ignite mining jobs, we're not claiming otherwise, but still to keep a significant amount of jobs in the Ignite industry is very, very good. Nikos, you're like another oracle from Delphi. Hey, thanks for sharing all this with our audience today. Thank you very much. It was a pleasure. It was a pleasure. Bye bye. Since Nikos and I spoke, coal to solar and renewable developments around the world have continued to take off. Before we end the show, I'm going to detail just a few more. As I said at the top of the pod, I've been covering coal mining and energy for decades, starting from when I was a grad student working for a coal research center in the U.S. state of Illinois around 2000 or so. At the time, Illinois, which has the most coal reserves of any U.S. state, was experiencing a mining and burning resurgence. Now, some 20 years later, across Illinois, at least nine major coal-fired power plants are on track to become solar farms and battery storage facilities over the next three years. Also, while I was a grad student in 2002, I had the chance to study in the coal mining regions of eastern Czech Republic and Ostrava, and while I was there, I visited several of its super deep coal mines. Since then, many of these plants or mines have closed, leaving behind the question of what to do with their infrastructure. Recently, a deal was struck between the Diamo, the Czech state-owned company tasked with mitigating the consequences of the country's mines, and a U.K.-based underground energy storage company, Gravitricity, to convert the closed Darkov coal complex into a storage and hydrogen and solar hub. Renamed Eden Silesia, Gravitricity hopes to transform a Darkov mine into the first full scale gravity energy storage site in Europe, while also constructing a PV power plant there with an eye towards eventual green hydrogen generation. Gravitricity estimates that worldwide there are around 14,000 mines which could be similarly suitable for gravity energy storage. At the same time, on virtually the other side of the globe, the nation of Bangladesh just announced it's seeking partners to build out a series of solar power plants on ponds created from decades of extraction, including to start at a mine in the Dinjapur district. According to the Bangladesh Power Development Board officials, this project alone has the capacity to host a floating solar power plant with up to 50 megawatts of capacity. Staying in Bangladesh, the Singapore-based energy developer Sembcorp has announced plans to deploy more than 400 megawatts of solar PV at another coal facility near Cox's Bazaar. Do note, nationwide all across Bangladesh, the country only has less than 960 megawatts of renewable capacity, meaning these two projects alone will nearly double it as greenhouse gas emissions otherwise keep rising. All of this is welcome progress. You have been listening to the Energy Transition podcast, a part of the Heinrich Boll Stiftung's Energy Transition platform. We'd like to thank the Energy Transition team in the EU office in Brussels, including editor Lisa Santner, digital coordinator Joan Lonfranco, as well as program head Martin Keim for his guidance. And of course, we can end this podcast without a huge shout out once again to our amazing producer, the sound guru, carnival king of Dusseldorf and bellowing bassist Christian Kreimborg. From the former German capital city of Bonn, I wish you all smooth sailing on what could be rough seas ahead. Until next time.


---

