# The Data Center Frontier Show - Master Transcripts

**Generated:** 2025-08-15 16:12:12
**Total Episodes:** 3

Episodes organized by publication date (newest first).

---

## 2025-08-12

### Podcast: Traka VP Craig Newell Discusses the Critical Role of Key and Asset Management in Data Center Operations
**Publication Date:** 2025-08-12T03:01:00
**Episode ID:** 5065

**Full Transcript:**
All right, welcome to Energy Evolution, where we explore the latest trends and innovations shaping the energy landscape. I'm your host, Taylor Kirkendall, and today we're diving into a topic that's making waves in both the environmental and economic sectors, talking about deep sea mining. Deep sea mining involves the extraction of minerals and resources from the ocean floor. Now, as the demand for metals like cobalt, nickel, and rare earth elements rises, driven by the growth of renewable energy technology and electric vehicles, companies are starting to turn their sights to some more extreme locations to find some of these materials, including the ocean depths. Now, the mining process involves these remotely operated vehicles that are equipped with specialized tools to collect nodules from the bottom of the ground and bring them to the surface. This technology is fascinating, but it also raises significant environmental concerns. The ocean is a delicate ecosystem, and disturbing the seabed can have far-reaching consequences, disrupting habitats and threatening marine life. So do be aware that there are some people that are pushing back on some of the development here. Now, what they're actually looking for when they go underwater is looking for these things called polymetallic modules. They're small, potato-shaped rocks that contain these valuable metals that they're looking for. They form on the ocean floor over millions of years, and can be found in abundance in certain regions, like the Clarion-Clipperton zone in the Pacific Ocean. Now, today we're welcoming back Jared Barrett. He's CEO of The Metals Company. They're working to mine the ocean floor. Earlier this year, The Metals Company formally initiated a process with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under the U.S. Department of Commerce to apply for exploration licenses and commercial recovery permits under existing U.S. legislation. Let's just dive right into that conversation that we had with Jared now. Hi, Jared. Thank you so much for joining us back here on Energy Evolution. Just to start off with, can you kind of give us a high-level overview of The Metals Company, what we're talking about when we're talking about deep-sea mining, and what it is exactly we're down there looking for? Yeah. The Metals Company are focused on developing ocean metals. Think of the planet as 70% ocean, yet we get no metals out of those very same oceans. We're focused on a deposit about 1,100 miles southwest of San Diego. It sits 4,000 meters below sea level in the form of polymetallic nodules. We go back to that global picture again, 70% of the known reserves of nickel, and cobalt, and manganese sit in this one deposit. If I was with you, I'd hand you a nodule that's about the size of a potato. They literally lie unattached on the ocean floor. What we've been focused on over the last 14 years is understanding the resource, how big it is, understanding what's the most efficient way of picking up these rocks, causing the least impact, and then also studying what the environmental impacts will be of removing them from that ecosystem. We're now getting to the final stages, where we're about to seek a permit to enable us to move from the exploration phase into the commercial recovery phase. We're doing that through the United States government. This resource represents an opportunity for us to ship those metals to the USA and help make America mineral-independent, a little bit like it became energy-independent with the development of shale oil fields. I'm wondering, too, one of the big developments we saw recently was an executive order from Trump supporting this kind of activity. Can you tell me a little bit about what exactly that meant and how those companies' mission fits into what the administration's thinking these days in terms of mineral supply chains? We know that the current administration under President Trump have, at the core, re-industrialization. They need to bring back jobs. They need to secure supply lines. That means you need to go and find where you're going to get these metals from. If it ain't grown, it's mined. Of course, what the West has done, including the USA, is, over the last decades, depended heavily on other parties. China and Russia are two that come to mind. When COVID arrived, it showed what happens when you interrupt a supply chain. It means that those industries that use those metals as their foundation can't continue, can't develop. Of course, in the last several decades, we've seen America lose those industries to other developing countries, particularly in Asia. What the Trump administration are very focused on is, how do we secure the supply lines? How do we bring back those jobs, bring back those industries into the United States? When the Trump administration was elected and the cabinet was chosen, we made the decision that we would seek permitting through the U.S. agency, NOAA, where the exploration and the commercial recovery rules already exist to enable us to lodge that application. We announced at the end of March that, in fact, would be our intention. Of course, we saw the executive order come out on April 24. What that really did was say, now we want to fast-track the development of these resources that we, America, have access to, both in our territorial waters and also in the expanse of waters. That's what we're going through the permitting process now with the federal agency. The executive order was an amazing boost for us, and it certainly focused the minds of those permitting agencies. What sort of timeline do you think you're looking at now that all these developments have happened? That's in the hands of the agency. However, the executive order made it very clear, and I know it's a personal wish of the president, that we see this resource in production during his 47th term. Of course, we are good users. We've spent the last 14 years getting ready for this moment. We've been able to put in front of them a very well-baked application. We've spent more than $600 million carrying out the research, both from the commercialization, commercial recovery system, and the environmental studies. We've really given them a fully-baked application, and we're hoping that we may hear news on that certainly much sooner than people expect, and certainly in 2025. When I first imagined all this, thinking about how far away some of these resources are from the places where they might be processed, thinking about how deep they are in the ocean, and not knowing much about the technology, my first kind of suspicion is, this sounds expensive. Can you tell me about the economics of this? How it compares to mining on the land, and whether this all kind of fits into prices today? Some of these materials are not necessarily at their historic highs. This resource offers many advantages. One of them is the high grade. It's often grade that is the real driver of the economics. It's polymetallic, so it's very high grades of nickel, copper, cobalt, and manganese, plus a heap of rare earths. We're not focused on them in the early days due to the processing method we're using, but in the future we will. If we think about copper, because that's the metal that most people are familiar with. While our resource has 1.1% copper, if we go and put the nickel, cobalt, and manganese into copper equivalent, it's well over 7% copper equivalent. Last year, the average grade of copper mined was about 0.6 of 1%. We're talking about an order of magnitude higher grade. That has a big impact in the amount of revenue we generate per ton of material. What people often forget is, what happens in mining is you have to invest an enormous amount in infrastructure. It might be because the resource sits buried underground, could be a kilometer, it could be four kilometers. I've been to some of the deposits in South Africa where they've spent seven years building shafts to get to the ore body. You've also got to build roads, and railway lines, and perhaps deep water ports, and places for people to live, and water systems, and everything else that goes with the development of a big resource. We don't have those same challenges. We have other challenges, of course, but we don't have those. That has a massive impact on the economics because it means that we can convert a production vessel and sail it on out there and be in production days later. It means that the scale opportunities for us are tremendous as well. It means we put more boats out there. It means that we can take advantage of existing, already built, and permitted processing facilities in various places around the world, such as we announced we're planning to do up in Japan. The intention is to build this infrastructure in the United States. Of course, an abundant supply of energy is a really important ingredient. America has it, and the administration is very focused on having more of it with some of the initiatives that they've announced because abundant, affordable energy is absolutely one of the key drivers to prosperity, and we're going to need a fair bit of it. There's been some environmental critics of deep sea mining. The other day, I saw a release out saying that there's a threatened whale species in the area. I believe a lot of the criticism has been around perhaps the unknowns of what happens when we begin industrial activities in these areas. Can you just tell me a little bit about the metals company's own work to try to mitigate some of these things and maybe your reaction to some of these studies? Look, it's the environmental angle that is probably one of the strongest aspects to support the development of ocean metals. If we go back to first principles, it makes sense that we carry out extractive industries in parts of the planet where there is the least life, not the most life. If you look at the amount of living biomass in the abyssal zone, we're talking about less than 10 grams of living matter per square meter, and most of that is single-cell organisms living in the sediment, about 75 to 80 percent of it. So it begins with the fact that there's not a lot of life there to impact in the first instance. But that still doesn't mean it's not important, and that's why we've been studying about what the impact will be. Will we actually disturb or will we actually help productivity in that area? And there are some signs that will be the case with some species because it's an area of very low energy, low food. And so we found abundances increasing in nearby areas where we had been down there collecting rocks in our commercial trials in 2022. So when I hear people like Greenpeace talking about potential impacts, they are truly grasping at straws now because we have been focused for the last more than 10 years on understanding those environmental impacts, and we've engaged 20 of the world's leading institutions. They've carried out the research. We funded, of course, but it all filled all channels back into an integrated environmental impact study where we look at a whole range of impacts. We look at the pelagic impacts and the midwater column and the benthic impacts, the sediment plume, and how fast a recovery rates and sediment plume is one classic example. And when I say sediment, think of it as driving your car down a dirt track. You'll kick up some dust. The question is how much and how far will it travel? And people like Greenpeace would argue that it's going to travel for thousands of kilometers. Our studies, which we sit alongside people like MIT, who've also published peer-reviewed studies, shows that down in the abyssal plain, the sediment, because we take in the nodules in the front of the machine, we separate the sediment and we spit that out the back, and it creates its own turbidity current. And it only rises two to three meters above the seafloor, and up to 98% of it settles in the area of impact. So contrary to the speculation from desktop studies, when you go out and gather real in-field data, they provide you the answers. And the answers are that the sediment plume doesn't travel those very large distances. It stays very localized. And so my answer to people with environmental concerns is it's reasonable to have them. And of course, our approach has been to address all of those, and the results of those many hundreds of millions of dollars that we've invested. And on top of that, many other contractors have invested since the 1970s. And for your American listeners, NOAA put together a programmatic environmental impact study, which was the work of four EISs done by contractors, plus their own work, which they submitted to Congress in 1995. And it basically showed that subject to more studies on the plume, which we have now done, there was no risk of causing serious harm in collecting nodules from the abyssal plain. Our work has further studied that and come up with the same findings. And we also have to remember that nothing has zero impact. But when you look at the two ecosystems, and you think about the abyssal plains and hills, which account for 50% of our entire planet, so it's the most common environment, there's no alternative use for it. You can't grow things there. People can't live there. It seems to be a perfect place to be carrying out this activity. Because today, where we're getting our nickel from is from tropical rainforest. And the problem with that is you've got to move all of the people who live in them out. You've got to tear down the rainforest and all of the biodiversity and biomass that is in it. And then you've got to dig up the soil where the metal-bearing ore is contained. And that's the beginning of the impacts. Then you have spillage into the oceans and rivers. And honestly, it's such a clear use case to be picking up rocks and turning them into these important base metals compared to the land-based alternatives. Excellent. And the last time we were talking, you were looking at permitting, I believe, for the International Seabed Authority. Can you maybe give our listeners just a little bit of background about that organization and why we're now hearing about you applying through the U.S. instead? Maybe give us a little bit of background on how that came to shift around. Yeah, sure. So in 2001, we applied for our first exploration license under the International Seabed Authority. And in 2012, our second one. So first was with Nauru, the other was the Kingdom of Tonga. And if we look at this industry, it almost got started back in the 70s. And then the United Nations got involved and a number of countries decided that the best way to approach this would be to agree a treaty for a number of countries. And there are now 169 member countries who have signed that treaty. There are more than 20 who have not. And of course, the most notable one who have not is the United States of America. And the U.S. from the very beginning said, we don't agree with this approach. We're not going to sign the treaty. We're not going to abide by those rules because no sovereign has ownership over the oceans. Every nation has freedom of movement, freedom of passage rights. They have access to the minerals on the seafloor. They have access to be able to lay cables on the seafloor. And what America did is stood aside, said, we still want to maintain those rights. The other countries who did sign UNCLOS, as I say, there's 169 of them now, said, well, when it comes to minerals, when it comes to metals on the seafloor, we're going to be bound by these rules. Now, in 1994, the International Seabed Authority was established and it had a very clear mandate. It had to put in place exploration and exploitation regulations to allow the commercialization of these resources. While protecting the marine environment. And so in 2001, they put in place the exploration rules. But here we are 2025 and there are still no rules that cover commercial production. And the main reason for that is that the system got overtaken by NGOs. And so the process was slowed down. Some bad actors became more vocal and they just used the process of delay. Now, at the same time, the United States in 1980 adopted a set of rules. We know them as DSHMRA and they're administered by NOAA, the federal agency, which allowed for exploration and also for commercial recovery. And so we made a decision in the second half of last year that's subject to a number of things. And one of them was getting a strong government in place that we would change our permitting strategy and apply through our U.S. subsidiary, TMC USA. And that's what we're moving forward with. And obviously, the United States are very clear on their rights over these metals. They've held two exploration areas in the CCZ, in the very same area that were granted to Lockheed Martin, and they've been in place for a long time. But it was really the president's focus on reindustrialization, their absolute focus on how to secure supply chain certainty that gave us the confidence that this resource could play a very important role in helping fulfill America's future ambitions. And while the support has come from President Trump, we do see it as a bipartisan issue. We had good support from the previous administration as well, certainly not the strong leadership we're seeing from this one, but we think the critical mineral challenge is one that will not go away. It will only become more important. And I think that for the last couple of years, we've been all talking about bits. We've been talking about AI and these new industries. And of course, what people are now starting to realize is that the atoms are super important because we need to build all the infrastructure to supply the energy to enable this to happen and to supply the industry to attract jobs back into the United States. And so it's an exciting time. And we're delighted with the support we're getting from this administration. And we're just, we're delighted at the prospect that we can get this resource into production on a short timeline. And now related to that, you know, I'm always curious of whether the market is, is that they're following these trends closely enough to know what's going on. And I think it took a while for people to kind of realize the importance of critical minerals, right? But you've recently announced a $37 million investment from Hess Capital, I believe it was an $85 million investment from Korea Zinc into the metals company. Can you tell me a little bit about, first of all, the significance of those investments, but also maybe how have you seen the kind of market evolve and its reception of critical minerals and understanding its importance to, let's say, energy transition? Well, you're right to suggest that people have been a little bit slow on the uptake on the importance of critical minerals, but they are getting it now. We wanted to focus the business more and more on the USA. And so we were delighted to see Michael Hess. And in fact, we announced Alex Spiro to join our board only a week ago. And of course the Hess family are very well known industrialists in the USA. And so to have them commit a very sizable piece of capital behind this idea from their family office was a really important initiative because they help manage some of the stakeholders who are going to be very, very important. And they've got an amazing track record of building globally successful companies. And I'm sure some of that will rub off onto our efforts, and it already has. This is not a passive investment. This is an investment, which I imagine they'll probably invest more in the future if the opportunity arises. But what we're seeing at the moment is lots of effort to help us achieve what our corporate goals are. And of course, Careers Inc. is similar. We've known that company, well, we've known the company for decades, but we've had good dialogue going for the last year. And their chairman is very committed to exploring how they can access more USA opportunity. And from our perspective, they are, outside of China, the only company that we think can help fast track what we want to put on the ground in the United States. And they bring expertise, clearly they bring capital, but it's that expertise which will enable us to move a whole lot faster and with much less risk than we would otherwise be able to. And we have an enormous amount of inbound inquiry coming our way these days. Since we announced at the end of March that our permitting pathway would be USA focused, people see that there's some certainty now about us being able to secure a permit to be able to go and develop this enormous resource. One thing I haven't mentioned, Taylor, is we know we've got a defined 1.6 billion tons on the areas that we've applied for through the US government. And we estimate with some other ground that we've added to the application, there's another half a billion tons. We're talking well over 2 billion tons of nodules sitting on the seafloor that are polymetallic. But if we put them into copper grade, they're more than 7% copper equivalent. There is no other resource on the planet that fits into that category. And so having strong partners who can help us develop this asset in the same way that we have all seas is one of our most important partners who are experts in the offshore industry. And it was their flawless execution that enabled us to run those commercial trials so well in 2022, because for the past 40 years, they've been solving very complex production issues in the deep ocean. They lay pipe 24 hours a day, 365 days a year when they're on production. And so they bring all of that learnings and all of that know-how to help us avoid making mistakes that early stage companies would otherwise make. And we see Careers Inc. and the Hess family coming to help us do that to an even greater degree. So a lot of reasons to be excited over the metals company. To wrap it up, my last question for you is, what are maybe some of the challenges that you see in the horizon in 2025? What are your maybe biggest hurdles that you're looking to face in the next couple of months? Well, we're going to be depending on getting this permit on the commercial recovery, of course. But we absolutely want to get focused on building that infrastructure in the USA. We're very encouraged by the administration's support that they've been offering us on how to get processing quickly permitted. Of course, I don't have to worry about capital so much now, because not only do we have access to lots of capital on the balance sheet, we'll close the quarter with more cash than we've ever had in the bank. I think the pro forma number we gave was about $120 million. So that's a good feeling. But of course, capital management is one of those things that we've proven to be pretty good at. But we've now got more expertise around the table. And the Hess family helped with that, of course. Alex Ferro brings an enormous amount of expertise in that area as well. So we're very happy to have his services available to us as to Careers Inc. But managing that capital so that our equity holders get the best return on their invested capital is always of the highest priority for me. Our shareholders have been amazing to support us. We're enjoying building a strong retail support base as we are welcoming institutions. If you look at the forms that have been filed now, you see some of the world's biggest institutions turning up on our share registry. I think providing we continue to show them that we look after their capital, then we'll continue to see that group of institutional owners grow and grow. So it's going to be an exciting little run-in into first production. And we've been at this for 14 years. And we're just grateful for the fact that President Trump and his administration is clearing a pathway to help us make this happen quickly. Thank you so much for joining us on the day and look forward to having you back for another update soon. Thanks, Taylor. All right, listeners, thank you so much for listening to the latest episode of Energy Evolution. I want to give a special shout out to our incredible podcast team members. I am once again, Taylor Kirkendall, but some of the other people that work for this podcast include my co-host Eklavvya Gupta, Camilla Nasher, Christopher Coates, Dan Testa, Karen Willenbrecht, and our wonderful agency partner, The 199. To stay up to date with our upcoming episodes, be sure to subscribe to Energy Evolution on your favorite platform. If you have any ideas for future themes or guests, we'd love to hear from you. All you have to do is shoot us an email at energyevolution at spglobal.com. And look, if you liked what you heard today, do consider sharing the podcast with others or leaving a review on your preferred podcast platform. We can't wait to bring you more fascinating discussions in the future. Until next time, take care and stay tuned for more from Energy Evolution. Bye. Bye. Bye. 


---

## 2025-07-24

### Leveraging Heat as an Asset in Data Center Operations
**Publication Date:** 2025-07-24T03:00:00
**Episode ID:** 5068

**Full Transcript:**
Hello, and welcome to the Energy Evolution Podcast, where we delve into the ever-changing realm of energy and sustainability alongside some of the influential thinkers and pioneers in the energy transition space. I'm your co-host, Taylor Kirkendall, and today we have the privilege of speaking with Rich Powell. He's the CEO of both the Clean Energy Buyers Association and the Clean Energy Buyers Institute. SEBA boasts a membership of 400 companies that collectively represent over $15 trillion in market cap. As of the second quarter of 2024, the members have secured contracts for 84 gigawatts of new clean energy, so major customers of clean energy. See, Rich is at the forefront of this mission to foster a global community of energy consumers that are committed to advancing a sustainable energy future, and while trying to tackle some of the challenging market and policy obstacles that come along with trying to achieve a carbon-free energy system. As we navigate the current political climate, we wanted Rich to share some of the perspectives on challenges that clean energy buyers are facing over the next four years, particularly in light of this big recent shift in federal government that we've seen in the US. He's also going to highlight some potential opportunities that could emerge during this period. We're also going to discuss how the demand for clean energy is evolving under the current administration compared to previous years, and whether SEBA members are starting to adjust their strategies for clean energy procurement. Rich is also going to elaborate on maybe the relationship between economic growth and this increasing demand for carbon emissions-free electricity, and explore how those two factors are connected. We're also going to dive into the critical issue of permitting reform, and its significance on facilitating some of these clean energy projects. Finally, we're also going to be talking about the federal technology neutral energy tax credits, discussing some of their relevance to clean energy procurement, and also some of the potential ramifications of this repeal that we're looking at in the US Congress right now, and what that might mean for energy prices and job creation. Without further ado, let's hear it from our talk with Rich. Now, a lot of things are moving on the federal government level. We just want to remind you that this interview took place in the last week of May. Hello. Thank you, Rich. Thank you very much for coming on Energy Evolution. So happy to be here. Thanks so much for having me. Absolutely. Rich, to start off, for our listeners that are not familiar with the Clean Energy Buyers Association, can you just tell us a little bit about your group, what you do, who your members are? Sure. So Clean Energy Buyers Association, we call it SEBA, is the largest group of corporate buyers of electricity in the world. And everyone's united with a common quest to find low-cost, reliable, carbon-emissions-free electricity systems. We've got 400 members, 200 of those are buyers. They range hugely across all areas of the economy. So we've got folks from big technology, we have manufacturers of everything from automobiles to consumer devices. We have metals and minerals and retailers and food and ag. If you buy a lot of American electricity, you're probably a member of SEBA. Excellent. And we've seen a really big shift in the federal government in the last couple of months, especially at the top, seems to be a lot less interest in things like the Inflation Reduction Act that supported some of these technologies. I'm wondering, given this kind of shift that we've seen in government, what are some of the challenges you foresee for some of your clean energy buyer members? And on the other hand, what are maybe some opportunities that might exist now that didn't exist a couple months ago? Yeah, well, you know, to take a big step back, the biggest thing that's happened in energy in the last year or so has nothing to do with the election or anything else. It's returning America, at the very least, to gross mode in electricity. So we had pretty flat electricity demand in the last two decades. There were a lot of changes in the margins. We built a lot of renewables in the U.S., we built a lot of gas in the U.S., we retired a lot of legacy assets that changed the electricity mix. But the overall size of the grid stayed about the same through that period. It was actually pretty extraordinary, totally unprecedented historically in the U.S. to have flat low growth. And that's now changed. So 2024 was the first year where we saw significant low growth again since the 1990s. And that appears now set to continue at least through 2030 and maybe beyond. Maybe this is just, again, the new normal that'll take us all the way through 2050. We are out of practice in rapidly expanding the size of our grid. And I mean that on all fronts. We're out of practice on building huge amounts of new generation, we're out of practice on upgrading the grid we have, and we're out of practice on expanding the grid, like meaning building new large wires and expanding the grid around the country. And so we need to get back into gross mode on all those fronts. And so the new political situation, there are absolutely opportunities in all that. There are also some challenges we're working through right now. I mean, the opportunities in this are huge. We have an administration coming in and we have increasing bipartisan support in Congress to do the kinds of fundamental reforms to our permitting processes and our transmission processes that I think people have talked about for a long time, but not taken a lot of action on. We now have an administration, and I think a Congress that is excited about taking deep action on those things. So that is a really exciting opportunity, and we're engaging deeply with policymakers on that. Some of the challenges have been around things like the tax incentives. And so we've been very engaged with folks in Congress around making sure that there's a very clear policy ahead on those tax incentives in order to keep electricity systems low cost and reliable as we get back here into gross mode. And we've done a lot of analysis, which I'm happy to talk about, which shows that if you hastily take those incentives away, you could see significant increases in electricity prices, you could see significant problems with reliability, and you could see wider economic impacts as those electricity prices then translate into a hit for the broader economy, not just for our great big businesses, but for all of our customers across the US as well. Can you maybe elaborate on a little bit? What does your research say the impacts are going to be, just to maybe put a little bit of color and scale around that? Sure. So we've worked with an economic modeling firm called Nira Consulting, and we've taken a look at what would happen if you took the tax credits away. To get technical for a minute, I'm going to say these are very specific tax credits. So they're often called the technology neutral tax credits, and they're production tax credits and investment tax credits for all new carbon emissions-free technology. So this would be for wind, and solar, and nuclear, geothermal, hydro, and thermal resources like gas and biomass, if you put carbon capture on those things. So those things are all now on a level playing field in the tax code. They all receive production tax credits and investment tax credits when you build new stuff. And so we looked at what would happen if those were rapidly taken away. And what our research at a national level found was a pretty immediate and pretty significant price impact. So nationwide, electricity bills go up about 8%. It's a little lower, thankfully, for residential payers. For our customers, we think of them something like 7%. And then for our businesses, and this is big corporations, and this is medium-sized, and even small businesses, the folks who pay commercial and industrial rates, their rates would go up something more like 10%, and this would happen immediately. And then we've double-clicked on that, and we've looked at a lot of individual states. And unfortunately, we see that there are really acute price increases in a number of states. And so places like the Carolinas and Illinois and a few other places, they see much more significant double-digit increases. Some states even looking at in the 20%, Maine, for a couple of reasons, is sort of more in the 20%. I'm happy to go through that in greater depth, but I think it's just important to know when you rapidly increase electricity prices, that also has other follow-on effects. Like electricity is something that everybody buys. It's just a fundamental input for our economy. So if you make a retailer's electricity prices go up, that means grocery prices are going to go up there. Also, if you rely less on these new resources that are going to come out of the grid because they become more expensive because the incentives go away, you're going to have to rely more on continuing to run the old resources that are by definition more expensive because they're about to be replaced. And so when you do that, for example, when you increase the run rates of a lot of older natural gas-fired power plants, for example, not only is that pretty expensive to do, but that also increases the costs of natural gas across the whole economy. So home heating becomes more expensive, and natural gas as an input to manufacturing processes becomes more expensive too. So suddenly you have this kind of compounding economic effect across the whole energy-dependent part of the economy, which is basically the whole economy. And suddenly you see really significant hits to GDP in a number of states. You see really significant employment effects, often in the thousands, even tens of thousands of jobs in key states across the country, and deeper impacts to just residential pocketbooks. If you look at just the electricity prices themselves, you're probably talking between like $100 and $200 a year across the country in electricity price increases. But then when you layer onto that the increased costs of all goods, and you layer onto that the increased costs in natural gas for home heating for so much of our country that heats their homes that way, you start to talk about pretty significant price impacts on a lot of folks around the country. And I think a good point to remember here too is a lot of people talked about these tax credits being relatively safe because of the spread across red and blue states. And you just detailed a whole lot of potential impacts of the repeal. But I'm just wondering, what's that conversation sounding like in D.C. right now? Are you hearing people receptive to this message of these things are important, we need to keep them in place, or is it still a fight on the Hill? Well, for those that are not D.C. policy nerds that were not following the votes that happened last week here in D.C., we had a setback on this issue. And so the bill that came out of the U.S. House of Representatives, so this isn't done, this is the beginning of the negotiation here, but the bill that was finalized, I get my dates messed up, either very late Wednesday night or very early Thursday morning. I think the final vote was really early Thursday morning and then everybody collapsed and went to sleep for the rest of the day. The members kind of did something heroic in getting this thing across the finish line. This is the massive bill that's going through the reconciliation process right now. It's fundamentally a tax bill. So this is the bill that would extend the TCJA, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. It was kind of the great big tax bill that President Trump in his first term, working with Speaker Paul Ryan, got across the finish line back in 2018 and made really significant adjustments to the whole tax regime for the country. Net was a very good thing for the country, right? Greatly increased economic growth. Everyone's 401k certainly benefited from this because we made a big, long overdue adjustment to corporate income tax rates. It was a very important bill that was set to expire at the end of this year. So all of those tax rates were going to snap back to their previous levels. And so right now, Congress has the unenviable job of figuring out how to extend that whole tax regime, which is a big, complex, very expensive thing to do. And so they were looking at that extension and then how to pay for that extension. And unfortunately, these technology neutral tax incentives and some related ones for clean manufacturing have gotten caught up in that conversation. Portions of those are being used to pay for that broader tax extension. So what we saw last week was the tech neutral credits and the clean investment credits significantly pared back, meaning that they ended a lot earlier than they would have otherwise. And the terms of the credits significantly changed. So rather than being able to collect the credit if you've just started a project, the project has to be completed by 2028, so the date when they are turned off. That's a really big hurdle in energy. Energy projects take a long time to build and put into service. So it basically means that a project isn't under construction today or maybe several years into construction today, they wouldn't be able to take this credit by 2028. They also added in the legislation some new language, I think well-intentioned language, that is trying to get it making sure that US taxpayer dollars don't enrich state-owned companies from countries that we see as foreign adversaries. So this is called foreign entity of concern language. That's the term of our FIOC. And they added some really significant new restrictions to these tax credits to go through this FIOC process, again, with good intentions, but the new process they've created is so onerous that I think it could be described as a poison pill for all of the credits. So it's not just that they end now in 2028 as opposed to ending in 2033, it's that the ones that can still go through have to go through a process that might be impossible for really almost any project to go through. So that's what happened last week. And we did see, though, that there was significant Republican support in the House for continuing these credits in some way, shape, or form, and dozens of members were very active on that, very public about that. And folks in the Senate on the Republican side, a number of folks have seen kind of what came out of the House and said, well, we'll need to make really significant adjustments to that in the Senate if we're going to preserve American competitiveness and electricity affordability and jobs in our states. And so that process has now gone over to the Senate, where they'll have to take the House's bill, make fair modifications, pass that, and then to finalize the whole process, it's got to go back. Both chambers have got to vote on the same bill. So eventually, they'd have to go back to the House and they'd have to pass it as well before this whole thing is done. And you mentioned earlier that we're not really used to this growth mode that we're going back into in terms of how much electricity demand we need. One of the big things that people talk about a lot in the energy space and how hard it is to build things, as you just mentioned, permitting reform needs to be done to make that happen. I wonder, can you tell me a little bit about what you see is the appetite for maybe getting in there and making it easier to permit and build projects in the US and what the appetite is for maybe tackling that this year in DC? Sure. So we need to do a couple of things on the permitting side. So we need to make it more straightforward if you've got a new generating project, whether that's a new small modular nuclear plant or a new solar farm or a battery facility, we need to make it more straightforward to site and permit that thing. We need to limit the length of the lawsuits around those things because our current permitting process invites the public to come in and participate in the process and then gives the public a chance to sue over the results of that process. And that could often stretch on for years, sometimes even decades or more. So we've got to limit that. And then we also have to improve the process and give more certainty to expanding our grid. So both upgrading the grid we have and then building new long haul transmission lines. So those are the major pieces that we need to do. The good news is that almost all of those pieces were included in a big legislative package that folks in DC called the Manchin-Barrasso Bill, because it was sponsored by former chair Joe Manchin, now retired from West Virginia. And then his equivalent in the Senate, Senator John Barrasso, who drove that forward, both in the Energy and Natural Resources Committee. That legislation moved really significantly last year. And it was actually an attempt to get it fully passed in the quote, unquote lame duck. So the period after the election and before the end of the year, last year in DC, we didn't quite get it across the finish line. But along the way, a lot of people voted for that bill and very bipartisan. So this was traditionally an issue where there were really deep partisan divides. You saw a lot of Democrats that were really concerned about changing the permitting regime, because often environmental activism has been more about stopping stuff than promoting stuff. And so they're concerned about changes to that. And then you traditionally had a lot of conservatives who were skeptical about building a lot of transmission across the country, because they were concerned about state's rights and who paid for that. And this was really sort of a coming together of all the camps, just recognizing we've got to get back into build mode, and we've got this huge new electricity demand coming. And so we're really optimistic that in this Congress, especially once we're through this reconciliation bill, we can get back to a robust bipartisan conversation about getting this done. I think the crucial thing for folks to remember is that this is real energy policy, and energy policy can't move through the US Congress through this reconciliation procedure. It's got to be something that just moves in normal, regular order, particularly through the Senate. And that means 60 votes are required in the Senate, and that means it's got to be bipartisan. So regardless of what it is, it's going to have to be a big compromise where all sides give a little to get a lot. And we do think that there's a solution there that at the very least can make a lot of positive motion forward in this Congress, but maybe even get completed in this Congress. And I think you'd have an administration that would want to sign a big piece of legislation like that, because it knows how urgent it is that we fix this permitting regime and get us building fast. And when we talk about these zero carbon energy resources, I know we mentioned solar, wind, nuclear, those jump to mind really quickly. But we also have an administration that for the first time in a while is talking about things like coal plants again. I'm wondering, does carbon capture and some of those technologies fit into this as far as SEBA's concerned? Or do you guys have a position on whether that's a viable technology for meeting some of these needs? So our position is that we are four carbon emissions-free technologies, and then our various members decide which one of those work for themselves and their approaches and their philosophies. And so we've got folks that have a variety of perspectives on this. Some have come out very publicly and said that things like natural gas with carbon capture would work within their framework in certain circumstances. And so just notably both Meta, Google, for example, have come out and said that it would work to advance their approach, and they've got different projects going in different places on that. And I think the key questions in folks' minds are, what about the methane that goes into the machine? Is that responsible methane? So are we making sure that there aren't a lot of leaks along the way? How much of the CO2 are you capturing when you burn the gas and turn it into electricity? Are you doing something with the CO2 you didn't capture? So are you pulling that back out of the air, for example, with carbon dioxide removal or something else? And then what's being done with the CO2 once you capture it? Is it being permanently stored? And so I think those are the big questions that people are grappling with as they think about this. In terms of economic viability, that does remain to be seen. And so I'm very hopeful. I'm sort of a longtime advocate for more research and innovation in those technologies. The trouble is that right now, we don't have an operating gas plant up and running anywhere in the US with carbon capture. We've got lots of gas plants running, so we know that technology works really well. And we've got lots of carbon capture running, so we know that works really well. We do tens of millions of tons a year over time, about 10 million tons a year in the US of capture. We know that works well. It can be permanently sequestered. It's safe and effective. We haven't put those two things together in the US in a while. We had one back in the 1990s, believe it or not, a small gas plant with carbon capture running in the Northeast. It operated just fine, so we know it could be done. But people get a lot more confident when there's something out there for them to go and to look at, and then ideally when there's a couple of different people with a product offering around it. So there are a number of companies that have live offerings now, and a number of our buyers of electricity are evaluating those offerings, and I think it remains to be seen. Last year was a breakthrough year for nuclear amongst our members, and so we had multiple different members sign some version of power purchase agreements, or bring old plants back online, or make investments in advanced nuclear companies. So companies got to conviction on advanced nuclear last year. We'll see if folks come out publicly and get to conviction on gas with CCS in particular this year. And you mentioned growth again. For the longest time, any kind of economic growth or demand growth necessarily meant that we were going to have increased emissions, and that story is definitely changing. But I'm wondering, are we technologically, are we there at the point where we can realistically say, hey, we can go out here and grow the economy, but also grow electricity demand without increasing emissions, or are we a little ways off from that still? So when you think about the kind of growth we have today, we're experiencing right now, we actually need grids to grow with more capacity through a whole year. So that means that new capacity needs to be added to grids that run with high reliability, 24-7, 365. And so we're getting very close to the point where all of that growth could be met with new low-carbon electricity. But there are portions of a year when we still struggle. So we've got terrific tools in solar, and in wind, and in battery storage. And so all of those things, there are huge amounts of those that are commercially viable today. They're sitting and waiting in interconnect queues around the country. This gets into a nerdy topic, but there's just an enormous amount of this that is already applied to get itself connected to the big regional transmission organizations that run our grids around the country. Our whole grid today is about 1,100 gigawatt hours, or 1.1 terawatts. Waiting in those lines around the country, there's 1.5 terawatts, or 1,500 gigawatts of new projects that want to get connected. So we've got a lot with those. But when you put together those solar projects, and those wind projects, and those battery projects, they typically don't fully cover all 24-7, 365 hours in the year. And so we're still needing what folks often call clean, firm technologies that can actually run all of those times. So they could be dispatched in the particular times when the sun isn't shining, and the wind isn't blowing, and it's too many hours away from when they last did, so our existing batteries can work. And so those clean, firm technologies, we sort of know what the candidates are. We know it's small modular reactors or advanced nuclear. We know it's enhanced geothermal technologies. We know it's really advanced batteries. People call this long-duration energy storage. So things that could store electricity not just for a couple hours, but often for weeks. And we know it's some form of carbon capture, right? So gas plants with carbon capture, for example, best candidate. Oh, and maybe commercial fusion, which, fascinatingly, is closer on the horizon than a lot of people probably realize. So those are the candidate technologies out there. None of them today are running at big commercial scale. So none of them today are quite where solar, and wind, and short-duration battery storage are. And we need to get at least one of those, and ideally a couple of those, up to full commercial readiness very soon if we're actually going to meet all of that low growth clean. But the good news is that we can meet the vast majority of that low growth in a very clean way. So regardless how you look at it, the carbon intensity of our economy will continue to go down through this period of growth. But obviously, the carbon intensity going down is only good for so long. We actually do need to completely reduce CO2 in our economy. And so we need some of those clean, firm technologies to fully beat that gap. Excellent, Rich. Thank you so much for joining us on the show today. Thank you so much for having me. Really enjoyed the conversation. All right, listeners, thank you so much for listening to the latest episode of Energy Evolution. I want to give a special shout out to our incredible podcast team members. I am, once again, Taylor Kirkendall. But some of the other people that work for this podcast include my co-host, Eklavvya Gupta, Camilla Nashert, Christopher Coates, Dan Testa, Karen Willenbrecht, and our wonderful agency partner, The 199. To stay up to date with our upcoming episodes, be sure to subscribe to Energy Evolution on your favorite platform. If you have any ideas for future themes or guests, we'd love to hear from you. All you have to do is shoot us an email at energyevolution at spglobal.com. And look, if you liked what you heard today, do consider sharing the podcast with others or leaving a review on your preferred podcast platform. We can't wait to bring you more fascinating discussions in the future. Until next time, take care, and stay tuned for more from Energy Evolution.


---

## 2025-07-22

### Powering AI Data Centers: Eaton on Infrastructure, Cooling, and Whats Next
**Publication Date:** 2025-07-22T17:02:19
**Episode ID:** 5069

**Full Transcript:**
Hello and welcome to the Energy Evolution Podcast, brought to you by S&P Global Commodity Insights, where we zero in on all things energy transition. I'm your host Ikhlavya Gupte, and in this episode we will try to shed some light on an event that shocked the European electricity industry and sparked debates about the reliability of our decarbonized power systems. The incident in question is of course the recent power outage on the Iberian Peninsula, which plunged much of Spain and Portugal into darkness for several hours in late April. To discuss this in more intricate detail, I'm joined by correspondent Camilla Naschert, who has been closely following not only the event, but also the fallout from the Iberian blackout. Welcome Camilla. Hi Ikhlavya. So Camilla, I guess many of our listeners will have closely followed this story, but can you please give us a quick recap of what happened? Yeah, so the outage happened on April 28th, around 12.30pm Spanish time, when data from transmission system operator Red Electrica showed a plunge in power consumption, from around 25 gigawatts to 10 gigawatts, while there were also reports of a complete loss of load. The blackout disrupted key infrastructure across both Spain and Portugal, think public transportation, traffic signals, hospitals, manufacturing plants, digital payment systems, etc. Banking systems were also interrupted, metros and trains were stopped, and many hospitals had to activate on-site generators and reduce services while power was being restored. Now by April 29th at 7am, the power system had recovered 99.9% of its demand. The restart was also helped by imports from France and Morocco. And since then, we've had an investigation by Spanish authorities into the cause of the outage is ongoing, and power plant operators and the TSO are denying responsibility and blaming each other. And the context of that is that whoever is found liable may have to pay hefty fines. Now to get into the details of the event and its consequences, let's hear from Kerry Tucker-Smith, Senior Analyst for European Power, and from Alexandre Mass, Power and Renewables Analyst, both from Commodity Insights. Kerry, Alexandre, thank you so much for joining us on Energy Evolution. So today we'll be diving into this Spanish-Iberian power blackout that we saw last month. We're now a month on from the event and still asking a lot of questions around the cause and the implications. But do you want to start by describing the event of this outage, also maybe in historical context, how significant was this of an event? Yeah, hi there, and thank you for having us on the podcast. So what we saw on April 28th was a cascade of events in the Spanish grid, which over the course of just a few minutes saw a whole system blackout in Spain, Portugal, as well as parts of southern France. And as a result, there was widespread disruption, everything from communication to payment systems to transport, industry, everything went down. So in Western Europe, blackouts of this magnitude are rare. The blackout in Spain is likely the largest of this century so far, but they do happen. The last major blackout in the region was in the UK in August 2019, with about a million people affected, but it was fairly short in duration, so lasting just a few minutes to about an hour. Further back in 2006, there were blackouts in Western and Central Europe. Now these again were very short duration, but they were very widespread geographically. You have to go back to Italy and Switzerland in 2003 to get an outage of a similar size where a tree touched a power line leading to a series of grid failures and almost the whole country lost power for anywhere between an hour to 12 hours. But smaller scale blackouts are more common in Eastern Europe, for example. I think just this week, North Macedonia experienced a countrywide blackout, which lasted approximately around one hour. And if we're just going back to what happened last year, in June 2024, we have been seeing that the Balkans region has experienced widespread blackouts. And this is a very interesting topic. But going back about the implications of the blackout, I think that we have been seeing multiple impacts in Spain regarding its energy markets. Maybe something we can then show afterwards. Yeah, no, let's get into that. How has the market reacted to this event? So on the day of the blackout, intraday auctions in Spain, which are held continuously and on an hourly basis, were halted because the grid was obviously managed by the TSO for 24 hours basically. And then basically the auction resumed the day after. But we can kind of summarize the impact on Spanish power markets with the two following impacts. The first is basically, I think since 12th of May, we have been seeing the Portuguese TSO REN just limiting the available interconnection capacity between the countries, between two countries. This means that basically Portugal can import less power from Spain. And something interesting is that limitation has occurred from 9am on the morning to 7pm on the evening. And usually during this timeframe, we are seeing that Portugal is importing power from Spain as solar generation is rising in the country and kind of pressurizing prices. And this time, because capacity was lower, we have seen that surplus being kept in Spain. And as a result, the two markets kind of coupled. Something interesting is that the Spanish market has seen its lowest ever power prices since then. I think it was minus 15 euros per megawatt hour, which is a very interesting topic as only two years ago, those negative prices didn't exist. If we are going to the maybe second impact, I think that the Spanish system has been running on the safe mode basis since the end of the blackout, which is something confirmed by the energy ministry in Spain. And this has led to very high redispatch levels in Spain. But this means that basically, even still we aren't seeing no thermal capacity being selected on the day ahead market. The TSO has lifted that amount of thermal generation since the end of the blackout. And this has no impact on day ahead prices nor on futures, but this has profound impacts in terms of electricity bills and gas demand in the country. Maybe if we can take a step back and look at the Spanish electricity grid and the power mix in Spain, obviously, we've seen huge shifts in that across all of Europe, not just in Iberia. But what can we say about how the power mix and the grid in Spain have evolved in recent years, obviously, as the energy transition has gone on? So what do we know about that? I think you're right. Basically, the transformation of Spain's generation mix really mirrors what is the plan for several European countries in terms of decarbonization of their power system. Only a decade ago, Spanish generation mix was dominated by coal, gas, nuclear, and only very little by renewables. And in 2024, wind and solar generation only accounted for nearly 45% of its power demands. And when we include hydro, that figure rise to nearly 60%, which is very impressive. And obviously, as you pointed out, this shift has been driven by a fast increase in solar capacity. Basically, in 2024, capacity was above 40 gigawatts, which is nine times above its 2015 level. So yes, very impressive and fast transformation. I think that a key development has been the rise of decentralized energy assets. Just to be clear now, nearly a quarter of the Spanish solar fleet is installed on rooftops, which is operating kind of outside TSO control. Meanwhile, when the country was retiring coal plants, for instance, those plants were large capacity plants, which were grid connected. So you have also that shift from large centralized plants to very small, tiny decentralized fuel plants. And the final point about the transformation of the Spanish energy system is the fact that Spain aims to phase out its seven gigawatt nuclear fleet by 2035. And it's supposed to be starting in 2027 with the first plan decommissioning. And basically, this is the last nuclear phase out policy standing among the big Western European countries. And despite the recent intensification of debate around that policy, there are currently no plans to reverse that phase out, basically. And when we now start to think about the causes of this audit, we're seeing obviously an ongoing investigation by authorities in Spain. And then this, I guess you could say tug of war between the grid operators and the power plant operators. Now, as we speak, clearly this is a fluid situation. What do we know? What can we say for sure, if anything, about the causes? Yeah. So at the time of recording on 23rd of May, as you said, the exact cause of the outage isn't known. Lots of investigations underway. In the immediate aftermath, there's been a huge amount of finger pointing, blaming everything from the amount of renewables in the grid, creating instability and low inertia, blaming the low levels of nuclear on the system, blaming lack of grid investment, some suggestions of IT and cyber attacks. And as you say, just yesterday, there were reports from the chair of the Spanish TSO, Ari's parent company, blaming large power plants for not doing the job of voltage control, which needless to say is being pushed back on by the major generators. So what we do know is that we have a timeline. We know that around 30 minutes prior to the blackout, there were reports of unusual frequency oscillations in the wider European grid. And SOE, the European TSO Association, has said that it dealt with those oscillations, that the grid was normal at the time of the blackout. So it's currently unclear if and how these oscillations were linked. We know that half an hour later, there was a loss of generation at a substation in the Spanish province of Granada, followed by two successive substation failures in other regions. So these amount to a little bit over two gigawatts loss in generation and resulted in a drop of grid frequency. In the last week, there has been a lot of talk from the energy ministry in terms of overvoltage on the grid. But we currently do not know what triggered that initial drop in generation. Did it cause the overvoltage or was it reacting to the overvoltage? That generation loss then triggered load shedding. That's an emergency measure designed to stabilize the grid. But that was insufficient. We're not sure why it didn't work. Finally, as the frequency continued to fall in Spain, the Spanish and French grids disconnected, which led to another massive disconnection of generation and led ultimately to the blackout. So from this initial generation loss, there is a cascade of events triggering the full blackout, all of which happened in just a few minutes. And there's likely to be a whole web of complex interlinked factors, which if they didn't set the ball rolling on the blackout, at the very least, they contributed to the blackout by making the system more vulnerable. I think that just was what Kerry was saying. We know that renewables on the grid was very high at the moment of the blackout, but they were not exceptionally high. Wind and solar were accounting for nearly 70% of power demand at the moment of the blackout, which is high. But as I said, we have been seeing hours with higher penetration of renewable on the grid. Just in 2024, we have been seeing around a thousand hours above that level. And something interesting is that super recently, right before the blackout in April 16th, Spanish grid at least met all of its demand with renewables, so wind, solar and hydro, which is basically the all time high record. But I think the figure pointing needs to be taken very cautiously. There have been a lot of commentary suggesting that there is a lack of inertia. That topic has kind of reverted back to voltage control recently, but there is a lot of conflicting arguments, as said Kerry, and there is not a clear single reason behind the explanation of the blackout. As said Kerry, it's massively complex. Just maybe opposing what we are seeing at the moment in Spain versus what happened last year. So as I said previously, last year we saw a blackout, widespread blackout in the Balkans in June, and we only got the report of the explanation of the causes back in February 2025. So this I think underlines well the complexity of those events, as said Kerry, it's a cascade of very localized and complex power system defaults. In the case of the Balkans, the cause was something very different to what has been discussed previously. For instance, the initial short circuit has been triggered by a vegetation growth which has been too close from the power lines. So this is interesting to see how those events are being analyzed basically. Yeah, in this case we simply don't know yet, but we can say that a renewable-led future needs a modernized grid and a way of managing the grid in a modern, clean, fast response way. And other markets have been perhaps a little bit more forward-thinking in this area. So just yesterday, California's system operator approved a 4.8 billion transmission plan to support the grid against rising demand, to integrate renewables and batteries, to provide upgrades for grid-enhancing technologies to enhance transmission capacity. Similarly in the UK, which is like Spain, a high renewable island, the grid operator NISA has been working to decarbonize its grid balancing and enhance stability using its Stability Pathfinder projects. So just in March, GB's first of five grid-forming batteries was connected to the grid in Scotland under this initiative. So those are batteries that they're an advanced battery storage system that can independently stabilize and support the grid. GB in general has been able to integrate a lot more batteries onto its grid relative to Spain, and a lot of those are active in frequency services and in system balancing. So we estimate over 8 gigawatts of batteries on the GB grid compared to just over 2 gigawatts in Spain, which by 2030 is expected to rise to 30 gigawatts in GB compared to just 11 gigawatts in Spain. And batteries are crucial to the markets for helping them integrate the rollout of renewable power. And I think the final point about this is that just looking at Spain's position in Europe, you can see that Spain is very isolated, both from a geographical point of view, and this has direct consequences on how the market is operating. At the moment, Spain has only one connection linkage, I'd say, with continental Europe, through France basically. And despite having this interconnection, this interconnection cannot mitigate that isolation as it represents basically less than 10% of its peak demand. We are seeing that in contrast to European countries such as Germany, Poland, which can rely on several other neighbours in case there is an imbalance in their markets, Spain has very limited support from its neighbours. In the case of the blackout, the interconnection just tripped. At the moment, the frequency dropped below safety measures. What does it mean? It means that if we were keeping that interconnection online, the frequency drops will have basically safety issues on electrical devices in France and Spain, and could potentially transfer that blackout in France more widely. And ultimately, the support from neighbouring countries during the blackout was very limited. Obviously, Morocco and France helped during the reconstruction of the grid, but this remained very limited. And looking at how fast the Spanish grid can be reconstructed, it means that further support would have been basically a great help. Just looking at what is happening also, there is a new line in construction at the moment between France and Spain, but it will be only commissioned by 2028. And despite seeing the interconnection capacity doubling by then, we're seeing that this isolation in Europe will not be fully compensated. And it's an area where we could see both blackout potential changes as maybe more political appetite for new interconnection projects could emerge, basically. That's really interesting. And I mean, if there's listeners out there like me who are just frantically taking notes, because there were so many interesting points just raised by you both, there will be a report by your team the same week as we're launching this podcast, so early June. So subscribers to the Commodity Insights analytic services will be able to read a little bit more with the caveats that you just laid out around ongoing uncertainty. So maybe the final point is around the kind of discussion that you just raised already about grid security. We've seen reactions across Europe, executives at every utility being asked about potential repercussions or similar events happening in other markets, even as far as the US. Why was this so impactful that it really prompted this wider debate in other markets? And do you think that is the right conclusion, the right concern to take away from this? Yeah, so gosh, why did Spain make the headlines? It's a really good question. I think it's a combination of a location and impact. Unlike most blackout events, it was a countrywide event, which lasted for over 12 hours from start to finish and led to a significant amount of disruption. Any event like this just highlights how dependent we are on our electricity networks in our modern world. And it's something that we probably take for granted, particularly in Western Europe. We expect this perfect supply of electricity. It also comes at a time when there's a lot of discussion around the electrification story, so the electrification of industry, of heating, of transport, around the build-out of data centers, which have got really high electricity demands and need this 24-7 power. So we forecast electricity demand in Western Europe to increase by 13% by 2030, relative to 2025, by 55% by 2040. And of that, we're going from around 35% of that demand being met by renewables to over 50% by 2030, nearly 70% by 2040. So that's a really big ask on the electricity grid. And it's the same ask that other grids across the world are having to deal with. So irrespective of the exact cause or causes of the Iberian event, enhancing and investing in our grid systems, modernizing them, adapting them for renewable penetration is really something that we need to be doing more of. We need to be putting the right value on what is really a critical piece of infrastructure. That's a great final word. Thank you both, Kerry and Alexandre, so much for joining us on Energy Evolution. We, the reporters and analysts here at Commodity Insights, will obviously continue to keep tabs on this story. So look out for the latest updates as this evolves. Thank you both. In the reactions to the outage, we've also heard an emphasis on the need to shore up energy security, at the same time as pursuing decarbonization. And to give more details into this perspective, we spoke to Alborik Mongrenier, who serves as the Executive Director of the European Initiative for Energy Security. They are a think tank and a campaign group, which is focused on building support for energy and national security across the European continent. Welcome to Energy Evolution. So you head the European Initiative for Energy Security. And I'm interested to hear how this event, this blackout, fits into the theme of energy security that has, of course, been high on the agenda in Brussels and other EU capitals in recent years. Can we already draw any conclusions from the blackout? And would you say this is a one-off event? Or do you advocate for seeing this as a systemic energy security issue? Well, it's not the first blackout in the recent history of Europe. It won't be the last one either. In Western Europe, we had a big one in 2006, which was caused by some routine work. Before that, there was another one in Italy in 2003, which was caused by a tree. In the US, you certainly remember the 2021 Texas freeze, which was provoked by a very strong winter storm. And more recently, and more consequently in Europe, there's obviously the regular blackouts all over Ukraine, which are caused by Russia's missile and drone attacks on the country's energy infrastructure. The point I'm trying to make here is that these events, they don't happen often, at least in peace times, but it can happen again. And the causes can be many. It can be weather events, human error, technical failure, often all of three combined, or it can even be deliberate attacks, whether physical or cyber on infrastructure, which Europe sees more and more of. That said, it's not a fatality for Europe. What it shows is that we need to be better prepared to deal with the increasing complexity of our energy system. And the best way to avoid and prepare for this is to invest in grids, interconnectors, storage, redundancy, especially with so much renewables in the mix, storage is very important. But we also need to invest in cyber and physical resilience solutions and components that meet certain requirements in terms of security resilience. Do you think policymakers are aware and companies are aware of this investment need that you're calling for? Or do you think there's more to do on that front? I think we already knew that we underinvest in the European grid. So this is in a way a helpful, but dangerous and costly reminder. I think we saw estimates that show that this cost the Iberian economy at least 2 billion euros, maybe somewhere between 2 and 4 billion. So it will force politicians to prioritize the grid in the next few years. And it will also push experts and technicians to find new methods to contain potential disruption. The thing is, energy security today means a lot of different things. It's security of supply, the traditional way that we all know, but it's also material supply chains, whether we're talking about minerals or components. It's also infrastructure security, I've mentioned physical and cyber attacks before. And all of these dimensions offer huge challenges at the moment. And they all get a fair amount of attention in the media. And they get attention from politicians also, whether it's Chinese mineral export restrictions, hybrid attacks by Russian and Chinese ships on undersea infrastructure in the Baltic Sea, the industrialization caused by high energy costs all over the European continent, etc. So the problem is less that the issue is not getting attention, but rather than that there are many different and very serious risks that the private sector and policymakers must prioritize at the moment. And it's been constant crisis mode in the world of European energy since 2022. Another issue is that such events also take place in a context of political polarization and debates on the energy transition. And some pundits are quick to comment and politicize debates and certain energy technologies, which doesn't help with a rational assessment of what happened in this case to the Iberian grid, and why this blackout happened in the first place. Yeah, I mean, you just kind of touched a little bit on what I was going to ask next, which is about this, I guess you could say finger pointing, or at least it's very high profile nature of the discussion around this incident, maybe even getting worse, but through the fact that this is a complex, multifaceted event that takes time to resolve and to explain. But when this kind of thing happens, do you think this is a good reminder? Or do you think it's a maybe also a distraction from other issues that maybe occur under the radar and are less dramatic? And if so, what are those things that you think are maybe being forgotten? Well, as I said before, I think there's plenty of things happening in the world of energy security at the moment, and they're getting a lot of attention. It's multi dimensional. So I don't think it's a distraction. It does point to the fact that we need serious investment in the grid. I think that's probably one of the most important dimensions of energy security for Europe going forward, electricity security, specifically, historically, when we speak about energy security, we used to think about getting enough gas and oil into the system. But as we electrify and digitalize our energy system, which is both our megatrends, and they're important megatrends and essential for Europe's energy security. But that means we need to take into account the risks that we have neglected in the past. And that's why we have underinvested in the European grid, we've invested a lot in renewable production, we've invested a lot in other aspects of energy security over the past decades. But we can't say that we are overprepared on the grid front. Otherwise, a blackout of this scale would not have happened. These investments must happen now, because the cost of inaction is very high, both for the European economy and for collective security. Now, your organization is lobbying for more energy security, obviously, also from a geopolitical perspective. You were started in 2022, amid the war in Ukraine, where energy, of course, has been such a core issue. Aside from the grid investments that you just mentioned, what are some of the other key measures that you're asking for on that front, especially on a policy level? Yeah, good questions. So we're actually on a number of fronts. So grids and energy infrastructure, generally speaking, is one aspect, but we're also very much focused on supply chains, the supply chains that power electrification. So I'm thinking here about critical minerals, but also critical components that go into grids, but also vehicles, well, the transport sector, generally speaking. What we see now is that, okay, Europe is moving towards electrification, which is great, can be great for Europe from an energy security perspective, given that the continent is largely oil and gas poor outside of a couple of countries. But that creates new dependencies, primarily to China, which has a very dominant position in, well, critical mineral value chains, but also batteries, solar, increasingly in wind, which is an area where Europe has historically been stronger. And so these are the dependencies that we need to be aware of. And in order to manage them, we need to be able to protect European industry from Chinese overcapacity in a number of sectors, in the sectors that I mentioned before, and also to support them financially, to make sure that we can develop the supply chains, not just in Europe, which is important, but also that we develop ex-China supply chains with other partner countries. And again, all along the value chain, from critical minerals to batteries and wind turbines. And that's one area where we call the European Union and European leaders more broadly, and countries, including Norway and the UK, to prioritise, to make sure that we're in a position to, to French or the supply chains as much as possible. So we're not as exposed to one single supplier, like we were to, to Russian gas, which was not the single supplier of gas to Europe, but the largest supplier, and is still a very large provider of gas to the European continent. So it's all things that European leaders, the European Commission, national leaders are aware of, but it's very difficult to execute in a context of limited national budgets, higher interest rates, and the era of free money is over, at least for now. And so that means that we need to prioritise strategic materials and technologies that are critical for Europe's energy security and industrial competitiveness. And that's not an easy exercise, but that's something that can and should be done as part of the new European Union budget cycle to invest in the supply chains that will allow us to move towards more energy independence. Great. Thank you so much for joining us on Energy Evolution. Thank you. Pleasure. So that is all for this episode. We hope you enjoyed it. As this story is evolving, we will be keeping a close eye on this event. So please check out our various news pricing and analytics platforms, and also go to our website, www.spglobal.com slash commodity insights. Now, do stay up to date with upcoming episodes and be sure to subscribe to Energy Evolution on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you prefer to listen in. If you have ideas for guests or topics, please email energyevolution at spglobal.com. Now, before we sign off, I want to just give a shout out to our other podcast team members. That includes my co-host, Taylor Kirkendall, Dan Testa, Camilla Nashert, Christopher Coates, and Carolyn Winbrecht. Also, a huge shout out to our agency partner, the 199, and the Commodity Insights digital content team. Thank you for listening. Transcribed by https://otter.ai


---

